                                       Address
                                          by
                     HE Sali Berisha, Prime Minister of Albania
          To the High-level Plenary Meeting of the UN General Assembly
                                          on
                           Millennium Development Goals
                            New York, 22 September 2010
Honorable President Deiss,
Honorable General Secretary Ban I<i-moon,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It's a special pleasure for me to address today this esteemed audience and present
before this prestigious UN body the recent developnlents in Albania; the cliallenges
and the achievements in terms of reaching the &Iillennium Development Goals.
But before I do that, I would like to extend a cordial greeting to President Dciss
along with niy heartfelt congrah~latiorisfor his election as the President of the
General Assembly of the UN.
A special thank goes to the Secretary General Ban I<i-moon for the excellent
organization of this Session of the General Assembly.

Mr. President,
Standing in this room today, follo\ving this session unfold, suddenly, memories of
the UN General Assembly of September 1992 came to my mind where I represented
Albania, at that time, one of the poorest c o ~ n t r yof the planet, with a per capita
income of only 204 US dollars, a failed economy, a level of ~nemploymentas high as
SO%. A country where chronic and massive starvation were still present, where life
expectancy at birth was getting shorter with the passing of time and child and
maternal mortality remained amongst the highest in the world. A co~mtrythat had
build in the previous 45 years 3.5 times more bunlters than residential apartments
for its citizens. This was Albania only 18 years ago, ladies and gentlemen.
Whereas today, again in this room, I am addressing this esteemed audience as the
Prime Iviinister of a co~uitrythat in such a short period of time has increased tenfold
the per capita income and belongs now to the group of the co~ntrieswith middle
upper income levels. Once the most hyper-collectivized co~mtryon earth, more them
80% of Albania's GDP is now gelierated in the private sector. During the last 10
years, Albania has reduced absolute poverty from 25 to 12% and extreme poverty
from 4.2 to 1.3%.
Five years ago, taking into consideration its priority project of tlie EU
integration, Albania revised and upgraded its Millennium Development
Coals in order to realign those with the needs and req~lirementsof EU
integration objectives.
To this end, only in the last 4 years, Albania has increased budgetary spending for
health care by over 40% for education by over 60% and for social assistance by over
SO%. We take great pleasure in observing that over 90 per cent of the pupils who
completed the 9-year basic education programme continued their education by
enrolling in liigli school, whereas 70 percent of tlie yo~ngsterswho graduated from
                                                                                      2

tlie latter were admitted in the universities. Tlie n u m b e r o f university shtdents has
tripled a i d Internet access is available in every scliool, tliroughout the co~uitry.
Life expectancy increased in Albania to 77.96 years whereas maternal mortality is
several times lower than that o f certain amongst tlie most developed countries. Child
mortality has also l<no\vn a drastic drop; nevertlieless, it is still not at the level it
should be. Tlie level o f child imniunization in Albania has b e e n amongst the highest
in the world.
Tile area o f environmental protection has lcnown tremendous progress. 98% o f
electricity in Albania comes from renewable sources. Despite the major world
financial crisis, our country's economy continited to maintain a positive growth o f
3.5 per cent, in 2009. This year, exports have grown b p 62 percent. Budgetary
revenues are 13% l~iglierthan last year and overall economic growlli prognosis
foresees a growth o f 4 to 5 percent.
Albania has created a very friendly environment for busuiess and investment and,
only in the last t w o years, has signed some 6 billion euro investments and
concessions. This year more than 3.5 million tourists visited m y country. Albania's
infrastruchire has been totally transformed as regards tlie road network, water
supply, energy, teleconim~inications,and health care s y s t e m a i d so on. Today m y
country is a N A T O 11iember and is making solid progress in tlie process o f
integration into the EU.
Distinguished personalities o f 5vorld economy a i d finances have labeled Albania's
development as a       q i i n ~ i t i r ~ rlcnp,
                                             i    but I remain ktlly consciou~sthat despite all these
achievements our couuitry has nevertheless a loiig, not so easy w a y ahead. Still
tliousaids o f people in m y country are stniggling against ~ u i e m p l o y m e n twhicli is
still at tile level o f ll%,whereas others are facuig poverty, e v e n extreme poverty,
while enduring the pain, anxiety and tlie cold tears t h e y cause. O n the other hand,

building the c o ~ n t r yand its infrastruch~renecessitates major capital investments.
T l ~ path
      e    of Albania is no way beautifully paved highway.
'Illis is why reaching or even going beyond the targets of the WIDG is for my country
a secure path to a new horizon of development and EU integration.
Mr. President,
These extraordinary acl~ievementsof the Albanicm citizens are, first of all, due to
their free initiative; they came as e result of their hard work and rivers of sweat for
which I \vould lilce to avail of this opporhmity and pay my most heartfelt tribute.
But, they were made possible due to also the deep and comprehensive reforms
carried out in my country during these last years in the fields of economy, health,
education, social policies in general, and, particularly, due to our ~mcompromising
fight against corruption and the reforms linlced with it.
Anti-corruption reforms are cn~cialfor the guaranty, the success and t l ~ eresults of
all other reforms. To me, the fundamental condition for reaching or going beyond
the Millennium Development Goals is first 'and foremost the permanent fight against
corn~ption.I believe that this phenomenon is today the worst enemy of free people
and free societies.
In my c o ~ u ~ t r tile
                    y , ~mcompromisingfight against corruption allowed us to double
public revenues in less tl~an5 years. Anti-corruption reforms helped economic and
otlier reforms to transform Albania into a secure country in Europe, but also in one
of the most attractive places for foreign investme~~ts.    Albania is rapidly changing
with each passing of the day.

I take this opporhmity to express m y deep appreciation to the U N Organization for
its continuous efforts against corruption, in particular, for its Convention Against
Corruption and the recent establislime~ito f the Anticorruption Academy in Vienna.
Mr. President,
In their 'vvay t o building a democratic system and a free marltet economy, Albania
and its people have had the precious help and solidarity o f m a n y friendly co~mtries
around the 'vvorld.
I would like to u s e this occasion to express m y deep and profound gratihtde to all
tliem, their government and tlieir taxpayers for t h e great generosity they sliowed to
m y nation while it strived to get out o f the worst isolation the world has k n o w n . I
also f r o m the b o t t o m o f m y heart tliank the U N Organization and its agencies,
Bretton Woods' institutions, U N D P for all the invaluable help they provided to
Albania throughout tlus period
A special thanlc goes to tlie U N Secretary General and his t e a m for selecting Albania
to be tlie pilot coLuitry o f the U N Delivering as O N E project. I reassure you that this
selection has brouglit the efficient cooperatioll between Albania a d U N agencies to
the highest levels and o f tlie tens and tens o f c o m m o n projects in all fields <andhas
helped m y country a lot in fulfilling the Millennium Goals and in moving diead
towards the EU integration.
Finally, thank you ladies and gentlemen for being here today and for you kind
attention!

