Country: Armenia
Leader: Robert Kocharya
Type: Campaign
Name of the Speech: Let's build together
Date: 21.01.2003
http://www.azatutyun.am/content/article/1570703.html
 HYPERLINK "http://www.azg.am/AM/2003021202" http://www.azg.am/AM/2003021202
Today's presidential campaign, launched by the incumbent Armenian president and presidential candidate, Robert Kocharyan, began with his campaign team of five hundred representatives at the National Academy of Sciences Hall, where his campaign headquarters are located. "Let's try together so that the victory can not be dubious for anyone, the victory is honest, through the people's votes ... rather than try to solve some issues through the use of administrative resources," concluded Robert Kocharyan, who attended the gathering. a large army led by Prime Minister Andranik Margaryan During the gathering, the report on the first presidential term was put into circulation in the book "Five Years Later"the electoral program, "Let's Work Together" booklet. The latter, according to the candidate, is much more specific than his 1998 program, and "there are big promises here, specific and large." "I'm sure we have everything right and we are able to count in the next five years to solve these problems together with you, "said Robert Kocharyan.
These promises are to continue promoting the creation of new jobs. Every year, 30-40 thousand new jobs, support medium and small businesses, increase pensions and teachers' salaries every year, provide all schools with computers, provide villagers with irrigation water, make 24-hour drinking water norm, increase the level of Sevan by 60 centimeters To turn the disaster zone into the development zone, to achieve international recognition of the self-determination of Nagorno-Karabakh.
Robert Kocharyan was in Gavar yesterday
"Let's drink together, work together!" Thus, the voters of Gavar have transformed the pre-election slogan of the incumbent president, presidential candidate Robert Kocharyan.. His propaganda meetings in Gegharkunik province yesterday. Kocharyan started from the village of Hayravan in Gavar, where Fatherland residents urged him to pay more attention to the problems of the villagers when re-elected.
After Hayrapan's short stop, Kocharyan was welcomed by Gavar State University students and rectors. Rector Hrant Hakobyan called on the students to give their voice on February 19. He repeatedly stressed that with his immediate efforts, Gavar University students, like other state-run universities, had the right not to serve during their studies. In his turn, Kocharyan proposed to organize a separate meeting with the students of the university in summer.
Then R. Kocharyan and his party representatives met with residents of the city and surrounding villages in the Gavar central square, where the provincial residents corrected the mistake they had made during a meeting five years ago and offered the presidential candidate vodka.
"We struggled together in 1998, we won and notwe regret The ARF Dashnaktsutyun is next to Robert Kocharyan this time, he will give his voice to him, "Vahan Hovhannisyan, member of the ARF Dashnaktsutyun party, said in his speech. According to him, the promises made for the five years of his presidency have been promoted by R. Hovhannisyan. Kocharyan has been able to carry out within 2-2,5 years. "During the rest of the time, he was busy bringing the country out of the quake." According to Vahan Hovhannisyan, though there are still unresolved problems, and they are always there, there is already progress.
Hranush Hakobyan, a member of parliament from Gavar, assured that at least two justifications would force voters to vote in favor of R. Hovhannisyan. Kocharyan: According to the MP, it is impossible to build a prosperous future without the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, "and the Nagorno Karabakh problem can and should be solved by Robert Kocharyan." H According to Hakobyan's second argument, the incumbent president is an experienced figure in comparison to the other candidates.
Touching upon the problems of the province and particularly Gavar, Robert Kocharyan mentioned that the most important is the BlackThe Lake Sevan Issue: "Five years ago I promised to launch the Vorotan tunnel. In spring the latter will be put into operation, which will not lower the level of Lake Sevan. "
R. Kocharyan promised to improve the entire way of the region as well. According to him, the asphalting of the Gavar section of the road will begin in spring and will end in the second half of summer.
R. Kocharyan is convinced that this region of our country has the prospect of tourism development, thanks to which jobs will be created. "As for your industrial capacities, they were largely related to the Russian military-industrial complex during Soviet times. Today we are trying to integrate those enterprises back into the system. " In what sense? Kocharyan says promises are being made.
Mr. Kocharyan also spoke about the same problem in Martuni, where he also received him with great enthusiasm. Residents of the city and surrounding villages were also assured that re-launch of local enterprises was possible with the Russian military-industrial complexin cooperation. The acting president mentioned that there are already existing industries in the region, such as the carpet-weaving plant, which works today with a double capacity of the Soviet Union and where the presidential candidate was yesterday.
In general, prosperous life in this case to have investments and jobs, as assured R. Hovhannisyan. Kocharyan: communication opportunities are a good way. "We will not limit ourselves to Selim road, which will be operated this year. You will have the best way of connecting with Yerevan, "promised the candidate. He also informed that a $ 8 million environmental program will be launched in Gegharkunik province.
After a short stop in the village of Vardenik, in the village of Gegharkunik R. Kocharian's next stop was Vardenis. His meeting with the voters coincided with the "Baze" pan-Armenian campaign. Hranush Hakobyan, speaking about Lake Sevan, As to Kocharyan's case, he said: "You are not aware of any international pressurewere used for opening the Vorotan tunnel because Azerbaijan was against such a project. But the Vorotan will be filled with Sevan. "
In one of the speeches supporting Robert Kocharyan, the principal of Vardenis Secondary School N2 recalled the resumption of Sotq gold mines. R. Kocharyan remembered his last visit to Vardenis last March. "At that time we held a meeting in the municipality and formed a protocol pointing to Vardenis issues. Today I report to you that we have implemented all the points of the protocol. But, of course, there are still many problems. " The residents of Vardenis are also R. Kocharyan promised a good road: At the end of the meeting he sang "base" singers.
At the end, Robert Kocharyan opened a gas pipeline in the village of Mets Masrik, which, in fact, would supply the entire village with gas.
Unfortunately, this pre-election tour was accompanied by two road accidents in Gegharkunik province. At the beginning of the tour, the car driver Mamikon Tonoyan's car had a minor accident and returned to Hranush Hakobyanand Vahan Hovhannisyan's car. Fortunately, accidents did not have serious consequences.
Robert Kocharyan's pre-election meetings in Ararat province
Yesterday Armenian President Robert Kocharyan visited a number of settlements in the Ararat region within the framework of the pre-election campaign. The President was accompanied by politicians and intellectuals Alvard Petrosyan, Lyudmila Harutyunyan, Artur Baghdasaryan, Aghvan Vardanyan and Garnik Isagulyan. And it's not accidental. The current president of Armenia supports a number of political parties, many intellectuals.
The first meeting was held at the intersection of Ayntap and Nor Kharberd settlements, not only these residents but also neighbors. In response to the slogan "Let's Work Together" chosen by the RA President, the participants of the meeting found out their slogan "We'll Work Together".
"I believe in the development of Armenia, I believe in the desire of every Armenian to develop the country," said Robert Kocharyan. "And I am very happyyour slogan? It means that we are on the right path means we will be able to build our country. Thank you not only for your trust, but also for your readiness.
Certainly, these settlements still have unsettled social issues, but in the shortest possible time, joint efforts can solve all issues.
In the second place in the meeting, Robert Kocharyan went to Masis with difficulty. It was not only the wishes, the requests, but also the people's protest to protest against the misconceptions of some authorities, but also to express confidence and sympathy. Mariam Avetisyan, 75, who suffered heavy losses during the second world war, the Afghan war and the Artsakh liberation war, will elect Robert Kocharyan because ...
¬ Because, bala khan, president, you are a man you've fought, you know well how much the peace is. Keep our country, bala, can you?
The mayor of Masis, Robert Kocharyan's pre-election rallySashik Hakobyan, Sociologist Lyudmila Harutyunyan, Director of Masis Medical Center Anatoly Grigoryan, National Security Party Chairman Garnik Isagulyan, Orinats Yerkir party leader Artur Baghdasaryan expressed hope that in the upcoming presidential elections, the people will vote for Robert Kocharyan because of no shocks wants a peaceful, developing country.
¬ If you recall, five years ago, no factory, no enterprise was working here, "Robert Kocharyan said. If we add that, how many refugees have been settled here nearby, we could imagine the situation. We have already implemented separate projects and we have serious programs in the future. Only 20 schools will be renovated this year and two schools will be built. We only invested 196 billion drams in the agricultural sector over 5 years. Let me give you another one. if 5 years agoIt was exported 16 million dollars of finished food, then in 2002, 58 million dollars worth of products were exported from the country.
This year's president's information says that there are reforms and will be in all branches of the country's economy.
Talking about his pre-election program, Robert Kocharyan mentioned that the program was not written in the office. "We have had many meetings in the area, we have talked to a lot of people, and then we have made our program that is not only desirable but also practical."
There was an unplanned meeting at the crossroads leading to Khor Virap, near the village of Little Vedi. the villagers simply closed the highway to meet with the President of Armenia. They stopped and talked to the villagers. And when the president denied a thank-you-lunch after eating one sponge, one of the villagers said: "Eat, Mr. President, a good working president should eat well."
Surenavan is one of the border villages in the Ararat province, only hearing the consequences of the 20th century war. Today:There are still unsolved issues here. The village has no drinking water (people pay 10 drams to bring water to the village to have one bucket of water), there is no gasification, the roads are not of high quality. But people are not just complaining and dissatisfied. They know that their village, their country, should build a people who love the country and the country with a responsible, responsible, working president. This idea was also in the words of Robert Kocharyan.
¬ I am convinced that he did not come to power with evil but with kindness, with love. Each one of us must love this whole country, each individual in this country, separately, regard the pain of this country as his own. Only in this case we will be able to look confidently tomorrow.
During a meeting with voters in Ararat, writer, publicist Alvard Petrosyan said:
¬ We have had hard times and hard times. But we are the owners of this country again because we have memory, and that memory forces us to make the right choice.
Do not love the president of the countrywe should not have a problem. He needs to believe it. The expression of this faith also existed at meetings at Ararat Gold Recovery Plant, Avshar, Valketap, New Road.
This visit of the incumbent president and presidential candidate Robert Kocharyan has ended. Everything was said, everything. According to the farmer Galust Hovhannisyan, who asked for the right to speak extraordinary during the gathering in Ararat, "we spoke about our president and the good and mentioned the shortcomings. But the most important thing is that we believe in him. "
People believe in Robert Kocharyan, believes, but also obliges. One of the speakers imposed the president. "We will choose you, Kocharyan's dear, but you will remove all those roofs." The President promised:
