Country: Armenia
Leader: Robert Kocharyan
Type: International 
The Name of the Speech: ADDRESS BY H.E. ROBERT KOCHARYAN AT THE OSCE SUMMIT IN ISTANBUL 1999
Mr. Chairman
Dear Colleagues
Ladies and Gentlemen
First of all, I would like to express our gratitude to Mr. Demirel, President of Turkey, for the excellent organization of the Summit. We wish Turkey an early recovery of the devastating consequences of the earthquakes.
Mr. Chairman,
Recently, Armenia endured one of the most difficult phases of its independence. Today's forum gives me yet another opportunity to express the gratitude of the Armenian people to our friends around the world for their understanding and support. As ever, we are determined to follow the chosen course of reforms, and we intend to continue our participation in the processes of European integration. We count on your support on all of this.
We view contemporary Europe as a multilayered political structure within which we advance our collective efforts to address issues of security, democracy building, human rights, rule of law, and transition to a more prosperous economic system. With its ability to address comprehensively these issues, the OSCE takes a particular place in the European architecture. Armenia has always aimed to be a consistent partner of all OSCE processes, both as a contributor and a beneficiary.
Our cooperation with the institutions of the OSCE is instrumental in helping us advance our democracy, develop our electoral system and strengthen the foundation of the rule of law. The orderly conduct of the Parliamentary elections earlier this year, proves the commitment of our state and society to the values of democracy. We are full participants to the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe and have been open partners throughout the entire negotiating process. Our commitment to the Charter for Europeans Security has, at all stages, remained steady and consistent. We would like to see this Charter become the blueprint for the next century's progress towards peace and prosperity in the entire OSCE area.
Unfortunately, fighting terrorism has presently become an unavoidable item on the agenda of all international fora. The phenomenon has taken on ruthless and unbound proportions. There is no country that can claim itself secure from the heavy hand of terrorism. We must join forces in our determination to stamp out this evil with all the methods known to the international community. The OSCE can assume a leading role in this process.
Mr. Chairman,
Armenia has always considered the present format of the Minsk Group Co-Chairmanship as most appropriate for the resolution of the Nagorno Karabagh conflict. Unfortunately, the recent proposals of the OSCE Minsk Group, accepted by Armenia and Nagorno Karabagh, have been rejected by Azerbaijan. This has sustained the continuous tension and suffering of hundreds of thousands of refugees. Nevertheless, realizing that the resolution of the conflict serves the essential interests of our peoples, we, through direct contact, are trying to convey to each other, and to the rest of the world, our seriousness of purpose. Our preliminary agreements, consolidated with the involvement of the co-chairmanship of the Minsk group will require the adequate support of the entire OSCE community.
We are well aware that the evolution of regional stability and cooperation in the South Caucasus is not possible without having the Armenian Turkish relations enter a phase. Our mutual willingness to open a new page in these relations cannot be based on selective memory and amnesia. We cannot forget the sad chapter of our nation's history and the trauma of the Genocide. But we are not willing to hold the evolution of our relations captive to contentious interpretations. We must search for the formula with which the problem can be resolved and we must therefore be able to discuss the underlying issues.
Mr. Chairman,
The Caucasus has always been an utterly complex and explosive region due to its ethnic complexities, religious diversity, severe historical past and the multiplicity of overlapping interests. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the adjustments to new realities continue to take place. The present treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe does not appear to be sufficient in resolving the existing security problems in our sensitive and complex region. It is therefore necessary to devise a regional security system for the South Caucasus, in the wider system of pan European security, which will engage all the parties concerned and primarily those in the region itself. Today, it is our collective challenge to transform the Caucasus from a region of conflicting armies and senseless terrorism to an economic crossroad of peace and prosperity.
Thank you.
Source: http://www.mfa.am/en/speeches/item/1999/11/19/rk/
