http://www.pmo.gov.il/English/MediaCenter/Events/Pages/eventaustria230610.aspx


Statements by PM Netanyahu and Austrian Chancellor Werner Faymann at the beginning of their meeting


Jerusalem, 23 June 2010


Honorable Prime Minister,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Thank you for your warm hospitality and for providing us with the possibility to conduct such interesting discussions regarding Israel.  I enjoyed hearing your insights regarding the situation in this important region, which is the focus of attention around the world, and hearing about the genuine progress we expect in the Middle East.

I appreciate the close relations between our countries and the strong ties we have had for decades, both economic and cultural.  The economic situation around the world has certainly contributed to the reduction of the scope of the ties between us.  We hope there will be new growth and new directions, and that we can work together on new technologies.

I represent the European Union’s opinion that we should cooperate wherever possible.  We Austrians aspire to see the peace process move forward and would like to support moving the peace process forward in the Middle East – without violence and weapons – a process supported by the steps you have taken so far.  When you ease the blockade, you will allow for the entry of food products, while of course continuing to prevent the entry of weapons to the Gaza Strip.

Cooperation between countries is important to us, and it is in the interest of the European Union to improve the living conditions of the Gazan population.  This can only be done by removing the blockade on Gaza, ensuring that the provisions needed to improve the lives of people in Gaza are allowed in.  We must also ensure that they receive their basic human rights and live free lives.  However, the security measures that Israel must take are legitimate.  Therefore, this border is important and we must take into account that you must guarantee your security.

If we are talking about human rights, cooperation and coexistence – these are issues Austria has always supported, as has the European Union.  We must stand behind the values we represent.  Supporting the values of cooperation by all parties, of coexistence between Israelis and the neighboring countries, will lead to regional development and progress – not just in terms of economic ties, but also in terms of sustainable coexistence between Israel and its neighbors.

Austria has always been at Israel’s disposal and has been willing to support Israel in order to continue the good relations between our countries.  My predecessors also always tried to strengthen these relations.

I appreciate the discussions we had leading up to this meeting.  I know you support the solution of two countries for two peoples, and that is the goal we aspire to.  I know that the Quartet also believes that this is the path that must be taken.  We are hopeful.  Wherever we can support you and contribute to this end, we will do our utmost.

Thank you again for the warm welcome and for the interesting experiences my delegation and I had.  I hope we can speak further about these issues in our discussion.

Thank you.