Gusenbauer International Speech:
Alfred Gusenbauer at the Moscow Economic Forum 23.03.2008


Name of Chief Executive: Alfred Gusenbauer 
Name of the speech: Alfred Gusenbauer at the MEF
Date: not sure
Location: Moscow 
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CAiOUDam F6k 


Gusenbauer: 
Thank you very much it’s a great pleasure to share this presidium with such prestigious thinkers and practitioners of business and economics like my friend [name that I don’t understand] and as I only have a limited amount of time please allow me to be focused on some of the issues that I think are important. 
First of all, why does this capitalism not work anymore? Classical capitalism was based on the externalisation of cost from the northern hemisphere to the southern hemisphere. And as soon as we switched into an economy of globalisation, this externalisation of cost doesn’t work anymore. And the remarkable ideological tragedy that is happening right now is that we all know that this recipe doesn’t work anymore and the prescriptions that are delivered to the countries and the economies around the world are that we all should do the same. And what is this prescription that is now offered to countries? We all should produce current account surpluses which is the general recipe to help your economy to come out of the crisis. I think this is a very interesting proposal because it leads the economic debate or transforms the economic debate to a mythological debate. Because the fundamental suggestion behind the proposal that we all should produce current account surpluses must be that there is life and economy beyond the globe. So that there should exists the possibility that we are going to export to the moon or to the mars or to another planet, which I think is highly interesting that the protagonists of this neoliberal model do not understand what the consequence of their proposal is. The consequence is that their proposal only works if there is life beyond our planet which at least up to now is not proven yet. 
The second thing is, I do not believe in the ultimate truth and I do not believe that anyone has found a solution to all our problems. This is why I am strongly in favours of heresy. I am strongly in favour of the social experiment that people, countries and economies around the world have to try to do their best in order to achieve goals that are valid for their society. And what are such goals? Such goals are of course employment, certain social justice in your society, equal opportunities for everybody in the society and there are many more. And there is no formula that is valid for all the countries in the world. But I think history tells us that there has been more and less successful political projects. And I am not here today as the chief propagandist of social democracy but let’s face it: if you look for instance to those parts of the world that have the longest social democrat practice of government, which are the Scandinavian countries, you will recognize that following some of the criteria they are the most successful countries on earth. What concerns their level of unemployment, what concerns their level of social justice, what concerns their level of education and health care and what also concerns the readiness of people to engage in a society and to produce social solidarity. There are of course also downsides that I do not want to neglect. There is always the danger that the social democratic welfare state is becoming to paternalistic. There is always the danger of beaurocratisation. There always is the danger of an insider outsider phenomena. So, there are a lot of downsides too but if we are looking to the history of the 20th century at least to my understanding, and not only to mine, no social experiment has been more successful than that. And I just want to go back to my friend [name I do not understand] who said that in the history of civilisation in his understanding nothing was more successful than the social democratic welfare state has been. Which does not mean that this can be taken as a formula around the world but the same ideas that have taken root in the Scandinavian countries and in other parts of Europe have taken root in Brazil and in other places around the world where the concrete practice of social transformation of course takes a different feature but the leading idea behind it is to transform the capitalist dominated market economy into a socially dominates or co-dominated market economy. And let me make the final point on that. Over the decades social justice was an additional political goal. In addition to economic effectivity, in addition to GDP growth, etc., etc. And that has changed. Nowadays social justice is a fundamental prerequisite for economic success. Because social justice only means that there will be additional demand that is more widespread and more socially distributed around the world. And I come back to what Professor [name I don’t understand] has said: without demand that is coming from the people, there is no rescue of the economy