Werner Faymann, OSCE Parliamentary Assembly
SPEECH MADE TO THE ASSEMBLY
THURSDAY, 30 JANUARY 2014
http://www.assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/Speeches/Speech-XML2HTML-EN.asp?SpeechID=60


Madam President, honourable members of the Assembly and the Bureau, may I first express my gratitude for having the opportunity to speak here before the Parliamentary Assembly? To come back to something Madam President mentioned in her kind words of introduction, the role of the Council of Europe, its tasks and challenges, in these times which are anything but easy, are particularly important. Precisely against the background of the history of the 20th century, Austria, as the Chair of the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers, feels particularly committed to playing an active part in building peace in Europe. The function of the Council of Europe is of paramount importance.
As Chancellor of Austria, I am very proud that the highest functions within the Council of Europe have been held with great commitment by fellow Austrians such as Peter Schieder, who was President of the Parliamentary Assembly. So there is an Austrian tradition, I feel, and this chairmanship is part of it.
In many respects, 2014 will be a year in Europe and throughout the world of historical reflection. The year 1914 marked the beginning of an age of wars and of mass murder, an age of injustice and dictatorship. Seventy-five years ago, Hitler’s war of aggression against Poland signalled the beginning of the Second World War. This war, and the Holocaust, were the greatest human catastrophe the world has ever witnessed. One cannot commend enough the generation of that world war, because after 1945 it held out its hand and made it its paramount goal to achieve peace on this continent. Anyone who accepts the lessons of the 20th century cannot allow the economic crisis to lead, as it did in the 1930s, to mass unemployment – to a complete lack of prospects, to poverty or to incitement of national hatred. We cannot allow anything of this kind to be repeated.
Europe has invested a lot of time and money during the current crisis, but in the European Union we have also invested a lot with those who are not members of the European Union, because we see Europe as a common family. We have devoted a lot of resources to taking the first step towards doing what is perhaps most pressing – rescuing banks and stabilising monetary flows, and thus, through our energy, time and money, supporting economies. It is right that since 2008, step by step, we have taken these steps in our united Europe, but I am equally convinced that we have not yet done enough. Banks believe that they have returned to stability, but we still see very high levels of unemployment – above all, youth unemployment – around our continent. That means that the crisis is not over, and therefore the political challenges cannot be considered to have been won.
We must not allow ourselves to become accustomed to these levels of unemployment. In this time of rapid change, we cannot grow complacent and become used to seeing these things time and again. Such complacency must not take hold when we know how many people live close to the poverty threshold and how few of them manage to find new jobs. We know how high youth unemployment is, and that sounds an alarm call to us all about how many young people do not have an opportunity to make their own contribution to being part of our community. They are prepared to join the labour market but they do not find an opportunity to do so in the globalised economy. The crisis since 2008 has shown us that today there are fewer and fewer solutions at national level to our global problems. Those who want to lead us astray will say that the time has come to concentrate on our national and domestic problems and that national injustices should be seen as justification to turn our backs on the international community.
Let us not let up when it comes to the repair costs after the crisis. Together with many other countries – many of their representatives are here – we have had the idea of a financial transaction tax, but that will not solve unemployment in Europe. It would be too easy just to come forward with one simple solution. Someone who does that is, to my eyes, suspect in principle. This is part of an overall puzzle. We need to ensure that those who caused some of the crisis should at least make a contribution to remedying it. We need to think about the huge resources that will be involved if a form of co-funding is required. Speculation based on wagers on the collapse of whole economies must be constrained. We must have some kind of guarantee of employment for young people and do our level best to generate more employment, because without the necessary sustainable and high-quality growth we will be living at the expense of the next generation. We need that growth to create the necessary foundations for new employment and prosperity in Europe.
We must not allow the wrong people – that is, young people – to pay the highest price for the crisis. It is our sincere wish that a whole new generation will commit itself with conviction to our principles – democratic development and the rule of law – but to that end society must be strong and these young people must find their place in the community. To give you just one of the worrying figures from our united Europe, since the beginning of the financial crisis in 2008 the number of unemployed young people in the European Union has risen by more than 2 million from 3.5 million to 5.7 million. It is therefore particularly important in Europe to continue to combat youth unemployment. We are pleased that perhaps the situation in our country is slightly better, but we are also concerned about every single unemployed individual, so we need to take up this challenge and overcome it – to take up the gauntlet to create employment and find common solutions.
Solidarity does not end at the borders of nation States, so we must not remain indifferent if half of all young people in the countries of southern Europe have no job, although not everyone sees it that way. What people call the rationale of the market in the globalised economy pays no attention to whether the prosperity of some is achieved at the cost of the misery of others. We must halt the advance of chronically insecure employment contracts. It is clear that no European country can manage this on its own, so it is self-evident that we need to think and to act beyond national borders. Incitement to hatred, to which some have now devoted themselves, is a very irresponsible way of proceeding, and we need to combat it. It is important to remember our historical duty to counter with determination the enemies of democracy. We must take up these important challenges. Prosperity is inconceivable without peace and social justice, without freedom, and without the rule of law – that is, without our common values. Closer co-operation still between the Council of Europe and the European Union is possible, and it can make a great contribution if we think about our specific strengths, so we need to concentrate on those. For decades, the Council of Europe was at the vanguard of human rights and democratic policies, and I am sure that it will continue in this way, because that has huge importance.
Discrimination against homosexuals in some member countries of the Council of Europe has gained significant attention. Such legal and de facto discriminations are contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights. It is important for me to emphasise that from my point of view a boycott of an international sporting event is not a suitable means of supporting the justified concerns of human rights activists. That would result in damage to international sport. But the discrimination that used to exist in the world of sport has been overcome. The measures taken in recent years need to be reconsidered and perhaps we need to continue our efforts to undertake international reorganisation, to bolster our work against discrimination.
Austria will continue to play its part constructively to support the work of the Council of Europe. What unites all of us here is our common commitment to human rights, social justice, democracy, freedom and peace. I wish us all the best for our common work. Thank you very much.