Address to the National Press Club: June 30th, 2016
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you Chris so much. Well, here we are, at the end of a long campaign. We are here meeting on the land of the Ngunnawal people and I want to acknowledge them, their custodianship and their elders past and present as we bring to an end this campaign and we hand the determination of the great decision here in this election, the great choice, to the people whose it is – the Australian people, because they will now have their say about the next three years.
These past eight weeks have reinforced for me that the Australian people, now more than ever, are focused overwhelmingly on the economic realities confronting Australia.
One strong sentiment I have picked up from so many visits to so many electorates right across the country, is this: Australians want the government they elect to get on with the job of ensuring that we have a strong economy that can set us up for the future; in uncertain times globally, they are looking for a greater sense of common purpose.
I believe they want our Parliament to offload the ideology, to end the juvenile theatrics and the gotcha moments, to drop the personality politics.
They want our focus to be on the issues that matter to them, an end to division for division’s sake.
Australians are entitled to expect that of their Parliament.
In these uncertain times, we need to stick together. Stick to our economic plan, grow our economy, create more jobs and build a better future for all Australians.
At this election, my Coalition team is presenting a clear economic plan to secure Australia’s future.
From day one, if re-elected, we will be working harder than ever to deliver our national economic plan - driving investment, jobs and growth, firing up our high-tech innovation sector, ensuring as many of our defence dollars are spent here in Australia, investing in advanced manufacturing, opening up thousands more export opportunities for farmers, tourism and service industries in the giant markets of Asia. Providing tax incentives for tens of thousands of small family enterprises to grow, to innovate, to invest and to employ more Australians and ensuring that the Budget is managed responsibly and prudently so that we can guarantee funding, well into the future, for hospitals, schools, Medicare, roads and all the other vital services and infrastructure.
From day one, my Government will be seeking passage of legislation to deliver middle income tax cuts to over 2.5 million Australian taxpayers and enterprise tax cuts to 870,000 incorporated small businesses with turnovers below $10 million.
Those businesses currently employ 3.44 million Australians and our tax cuts will encourage them to grow, providing more jobs for all Australians.
From day one, if re-elected, the Coalition will be presenting legislation to amend the Fair Work Act so we can stop the takeover of the Country Fire Authority in Victoria - protecting 60,000 volunteer firefighters from a power grab orchestrated by the United Firefighters Union and the Andrews Labor government in Victoria.
And we will convene a joint sitting to approve the two vital economic reforms that were double dissolution triggers for this election - the reinstatement of the Australian Building and Construction Commission to restore the rule of law to the construction industry; and the Registered Organisations Bill to hold union officials and employer organisations accountable to the same standards of probity and transparency as apply to company directors.
From day one, my Coalition team will be doing everything in our power to safeguard Australians and Australian business from the risk of any external shock flowing from Britain’s vote to withdraw from the European Union.
The aftermath of the Brexit vote is only one of a range of factors driving uncertainty and apprehension in a fragile global economy. It is the duty of the Australian Government to keep this volatility on global markets under close and constant scrutiny – we have to be swift and sure-footed to pre-empt any negative effects that could affect investment, growth and jobs here at home.
Now I have taken action this week with the Treasurer, who is here today, with the Finance Minister, Mathias Cormann, to ensure the new government, whomever is elected, will have the best informed analysis and advice from our Council of Financial Regulators – the Reserve Bank, the Treasury, APRA and ASIC – on any measures we may need to take, to limit the impact on our economic interests.
If re-elected I will meet at the very earliest opportunity with the New Zealand Prime Minister, John Key, so we can work closely together as we navigate our respective trade negotiations with Europe and with Britain.
Australians expect strong and decisive economic leadership.
They expect political leaders to have the experience to manage the risks sensibly and shrewdly -frame a plan of action and get it done.
This is vital to confidence and confidence is the key to economic security. 
I believe Australians share my excitement at the great opportunities ahead. From the farmers, winegrowers and orchardists of Tasmania now selling their clean, green produce into major world markets. Like Josef Chromy, a local winemaker in the Tamar Valley who, thanks to our export trade deals, is now able to access new customers across Asia, Europe and North American markets; or Grove Juice in Brisbane which, thanks to our Japan Free Trade Agreement, is now able to produce an additional 70 thousand bottles of fresh Australian orange juice.
To those advanced designers and manufacturers across the country that are making the most of our defence industry investment, such as Daronmont in Adelaide, Quickstep in Geelong or Austal in Western Australia, which is Australia’s largest defence exporter.
To the small businesses like the advanced manufacturer Omni Tanker in Western Sydney or Daisy’s Garden Supply in Victoria - that because of our enterprise tax cuts will be in a position to invest in and expand their businesses and hire more staff.
To the IT entrepreneurs, like Wayne Gerard, the co-founder of RedEye in Brisbane, at the frontier of the digital economy, or businesses like Carbon Revolution in Geelong who are bringing to life our National Innovation and Science Agenda.
Now Australia has done well to record 3.1 per cent growth in the year to March, better than any of the G7 economies and well above the OECD average.
But that in itself reminds us that we are in a low-growth global economy and we need to have a weather eye out for significant headwinds.
Given that uncertainty, my strong sense is that what Australians are looking for most from this election, is a step up in political culture - strong, decisive, resolute leadership, yet with a focus on what unites rather than divides. 
That is the leadership my team and I offer to the Australian people.
During the campaign, you have heard me emphasise the critical importance of Australians electing a strong Coalition majority Government.
Open markets, globalisation, the speed of technological advancement is changing our world at a scale and a pace unprecedented in human experience.
In this dynamic global economy, our opportunities as Australians have never been greater, nor our horizons wider.
But to succeed in the 21st century is not a given: we as Australians have to make our own luck, we have to make the transition to an economy that is more diverse, more innovative, smarter, more productive – an economy that wins and keeps on winning.
Australia’s 24 million people - all of us - all Australians, they are our greatest asset.
The talent, ingenuity and enterprise of hard-working Australians has delivered great success to this nation.
For that success story to continue in the decades ahead, we have to make important choices and that’s why I am asking my fellow Australians, at this election, to support our Coalition’s National Economic Plan for a Strong New Economy.
A stronger economy provides the jobs and the growth that allows people to plan their lives with greater confidence and certainty.
It provides the economic benefits to pay the mortgage, buy a car, put the kids through school, pay for a holiday.
A stronger economy guarantees funding for vital social services.
Now economic security is a concept known to every family as it maps out the household budget; by every mum and dad worried about their job, worried about the next pay cheque, worried about the next contract.
My vision is to set Australia up for decades to come as a high wage, first world economy of the 21st century with a generous social welfare safety net.
That means a thriving business sector, where small family enterprises are encouraged to think big. Our Enterprise Tax Plan does just that.
It means Australia is competing with the world’s best in the high tech industries and the jobs of the future.
I want to see our farmers and our service industries flourishing like never before, with millions of new customers in the markets of Asia to our north, where half of the world’s middle class will soon reside.
According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the number of small businesses now exporting increased by 12.9 per cent in the last financial year alone.
They are taking advantage of our export trade deals with China, Korea, Japan and Singapore, which provide premium access for Australian business to the leading economies in our part of the world.
And it will only be disciplined financial management and a strong economy that can deliver the growth in revenues to guarantee funding for health and education and all the other services Australians want and expect from government.
If you want a strong Medicare and we do, if you want well-funded schools and world-class roads and hospitals and infrastructure and we do - you need a strong economy to pay for it.
Our plan gives Australians and Australian families economic security in an uncertain world.
Now our opponents at this election cannot offer that reassurance – they do not have an economic plan.
Labor’s one and only strategy is to tiptoe back into government in a chaotic alliance with Greens, minor parties and independents.
In an uncertain world, Labor offers only greater uncertainty.
They have nothing to say about jobs, growth or our economic future.
Instead they talk about higher taxes, more spending, higher deficits, more debt.
They have been making commitments they cannot pay for and cannot deliver.
That explains the shambles around their budget costings. Over this campaign, it has been a sorry tale of Labor budget backflips and policy reversals. 
The first was on foreign aid, where they previously had said our policy approach was one they “certainly couldn’t continue with”.
Then they backflipped on the $4.5 billion Schoolkids Bonus, which they had previously said was “a demonstration of Labor's commitment to education.”
And then there’s the changes to the pension asset test - another backflip.
They were the same changes that Bill Shorten only opposed very recently in his book, saying that “when Labor formulates retirement policy...we look beyond the headlines and cheap politics.” 
Then in the shadow of our Coalition campaign rally and away from the critical eye of all of you here in the Canberra Press Gallery, Labor finally unveiled their Budget costings.
In that document, Labor not only revealed they have no plan for jobs and growth.  They acknowledged that their fiscal strategy is to drag the Budget further into red ink by $16.5 billion over the next four years. 
In fact, Labor’s bottom line will be worse than the Coalition over the next seven years. Put another way, by the election in 2022, Labor would still not have enough savings to pay for the promises they’ve made in this election.
Labor would be borrowing over $11 million more than the Government each and every day over the next four years.
Their budget bottom line over the medium term relies on over $100 billion in additional taxes, with tax revenue approaching 26 per cent of GDP – this would take Labor to the highest tax-to-GDP ratio in this country since at least 1970.
Labor’s fiscal strategy is predicated on no further tax relief for a decade or more. By 2027, under that scenario, an additional 750,000 Australians will be paying the top marginal tax rate of 49 per cent - a $19 billion tax grab guaranteed to stifle the incentives to work. 
Hard-working Australians will be appalled and the closer you look, the more destructive it becomes.
A negative gearing and capital gains tax policy which aims to hit Australians with $37 billion of tax increases - one of the largest tax increases in recent history.  Yet Labor refuses to reveal what impact it believes this massive tax hike will have on housing prices, rents, investment, housing supply, confidence, or the wider economy.  
A superannuation policy which extraordinarily banks all of the revenue that the Government’s policies will raise - but which - adopts none of the Government’s policies.  The refusal by Labor to identify the policy measures to support these savings defies all of the rules and rigours of public finance. For all we know, Labor could adopt the Greens’ superannuation policies.  Sixteen million Australians planning for retirement are left with not a clue about how Labor would change the superannuation system.  How is this acceptable? 
A hospitals policy which provides or promises an additional $2 billion over 11 years - when Labor has for the last two years, been promising an additional $57 billion in spending. They have failed to fund over 96 per cent of the so-called hospital cuts they solemnly swore they would restore and were advertising on television about last night. What a Labor hoax.
And a childcare policy that increases funding over the first two years and then cuts it over the next two.
In contrast, my Coalition team takes a methodical approach to Budget repair. Living within our means is fundamental to the Coalition’s national economic plan.
For every new dollar we spend, we make sure we find another dollar at least, through savings, elsewhere in the Budget.
The Treasurer, Scott Morrison, brought down our Budget on May 3 which showed net improvements to the Budget of $1.7 billion.
We began submitting campaign costings on 17 June. They are publicly available for all to examine and question.
The end result of our announcements over the campaign is an improvement in the Budget bottom line each and every year, totalling $1.1 billion.
In the Budget we announced as you know, the most comprehensive changes to the taxation of superannuation in a decade.
Now not all of these policies have been popular, but they make the system fairer and more flexible.
We had the courage to put them in the Budget and take them to an election. 
We will not be making any further changes to superannuation in the next term of Government if we are re-elected.  Mr Shorten cannot match that claim.
Our superannuation goes to the heart of economic security.
Mr Shorten and Labor are now a policy vacuum on this vital issue, playing political games with the retirement plans of millions of Australians.
Like his Budget black hole this demonstrates no economic leadership at all.
Labor’s recklessness is utterly ill-suited to the demands of our times.
They are in denial about the state of the Budget and the risks in the global economy.
As leading economists have confirmed, if elected, Labor’s fiscal profligacy and ill-discipline could put  our AAA credit rating at risk.
Bill Shorten has no economic plan to deal with the challenges of securing our future in the 21st century.
His priority at the election is purely political.
As he says himself, he wants to run Australia like a trade union. 
How else to explain his incredibly ideological war against business.
How else to explain his dishonest campaign to frighten frail and elderly people into thinking their health services are at risk.
Medicare is guaranteed under the Coalition and Bill Shorten knows it.
He has been mocked in this very room for spreading these falsehoods.
He diminishes only himself, but he persists with these lies in the hope that he can deceive enough Australians to think that government services never at risk are under threat.
Australians are well and truly over this tactic of setting out deliberately and dishonestly to fuel fear and division.
The only long-term threat to our universal health care system is the risk of governments adopting tax and spend policies that stifle economic growth, damage business confidence, discourage investment and employment.
Only a stronger economy can deliver the growth in revenues we need to pay, in the longer term, for the services that we want.
And only the Coalition has the plan to drive that growth.
Only the Coalition has a plan to support investment and create jobs.
Only the Coalition’s spending commitments are fully funded, with a sustainable path to surplus.
Only the Coalition will protect our borders and keep Australians safe.
And only the Coalition can form strong, stable majority Government.
It is worth remembering that Australia has not had a strong majority Government returned to office at an election going back to 2007.
And that is why this election is a critical choice for Australians.
Leave it to independents and preferences to decide and Australians will find themselves, this time next week, with no clarity about their future.                
It is a roll of the dice that could well result in Bill Shorten as Prime Minister, with unions, Greens and independents pulling the strings.
This threat is real. So when it comes to the minor parties - be they Lambie, Xenophon, Lazarus or Hanson - Australians need to consider very carefully the impact on practical policy outcomes and the workability of the Parliament.
I say to Australians again; if you don’t know the leader of a minor party, or if that is all you know - the identity of the minor party’s leader, but you don’t know their candidates - and you don’t really know their policies, then don’t vote for them.
Australians won’t want to end up next week with a result they didn’t see coming So I say again, a vote for Labor, Greens or an independent in one of the 20 key battleground seats across the country, is, in effect, a vote for the chaos of a hung parliament; a budget black hole; big Labor taxes; less jobs; more boats.
We can have the sort of chaotic government we see in today’s Queensland, with a minority Labor Government trapped in policy paralysis.
Or there is the alternative model of a stable, confident administration under Premier Mike Baird in NSW, where a strong economy and strong Budget position is funding new roads and rail and better health and education.  
So that is why I am urging Australians to vote for their local Liberal or National candidate in the House and in the Senate and to return a stable Coalition majority Government so we can stick to the plan that is delivering jobs and growth and securing our economic future.
Now obviously, there is not the time here to name them all, but can I mention just two local candidates who exemplify the dedication and the energy we ask of our elected representatives.
Ned Mannoun, in the southwest Sydney seat of Werriwa and Julia Banks, our candidate for the seat of Chisholm, in Melbourne’s east, have both campaigned so well. They are in with a chance of claiming two long-held Labor electorates.
Both are part of our great story as an immigrant nation. Both come with direct practical experience in business. Both bring real passion and commitment to the communities they serve.
So today, as I urge all Australians to vote for their local Liberal and National candidates in the House and in the Senate, I give a special shout out to Ned Mannoun in Werriwa and Julia Banks in Chisholm, two outstanding candidates.
Now, my Coalition team is determined that we show strong economic leadership and bring all our experience to the task of building a strong new economy.
Our role as leaders is to address the real priorities in people’s lives – secure incomes, sustainable health and education systems, a safe society and more and better jobs for their children.
Every element of our Coalition economic plan is directed at delivering the stronger economy so vital for Australians to achieve these aspirations.
Together, Australians have the talents and the capacity to make the successful transition to a stronger new economy. Together, as a nation, we have the resourcefulness, the resilience to get the job done.
And I believe Australians, overwhelmingly, would think it is not before time that our Parliament began to work with a greater unity of purpose towards that goal.
So get the next three years right, stick together, stick to our economic plan and we can all look forward with confidence and optimism to an Australia where our very best years are still ahead of us.
[Applause]