Prime Minister addresses attendees - PC PEI Party Dinner
28 April 2006
Introduction
Honoured guests of the head table, Members of the legislative assembly of Prince Edward Island, Ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here with you this evening.
And thank you, Premier Binns, for your kind opening remarks.
I’m very pleased to be back in Charlottetown with Pat and Carol, Mayor (Clifford) Lee, and my fellow Conservatives from across the Island.
As you know, my family’s roots are planted in the Maritimes.
And though I have called Toronto, Edmonton and Calgary home during my life,
- It always feels a lot like home here too, 
- Especially after Laureen, Ben, Rachel and I spent a few days on the Island last summer.
But I should say, wherever we go, it feels like home when I spend time among the members of this great family from coast to coast, that is called the Conservative Party of Canada!
I understand this is the largest fundraiser in the province’s history.
Congratulations to everyone who had a hand in putting it together, especially Nelson Hagerman and Norman Clarey.
I’m told they were single-handedly responsible for the sale of more than half the tickets!
I did want to come here tonight to especially thank all of you for your help and support during the recent federal election campaign.
Although we improved our results on January 23rd, we weren’t able to win seats here on the Island.
But we made progress. And I want to congratulate our fine candidates for their hard-fought campaigns.
Don Gillis; Tom Deblois; Ed Guergis; George Noble.
Next time, it will be different.
We’ll be a strong and known commodity. It’ll be a lot harder for the liberals to run their campaign of fear.
In fact, they’ll have trouble explaining why it was that the Island didn’t actually sink into the Gulf of St. Lawrence after all.
You know, the liberals are getting desperate already. I see that Lawrence MacAuley is now actually trying to take credit for conservative government announcements.
So next time, we’re going to do what Premier Binns has done. We’ll take our case to Islanders and paint P.E.I a bright Tory blue!
Friends, we’ve come a long way since we reunited the Conservative family in 2003. 
We did what the sceptics said couldn’t be done.
What the pundits said wouldn’t happen.
What our opponents thought could never come to pass.
We created a new national government – a Conservative government.
January 23rd was a great day for Conservatives, a great day for Canada and, yes, a great day for Islanders.
We’re going to show Islanders they can get the same good government nationally as they have provincially by voting for Premier Pat Binns.
Responsible government.
Effective government.
Government that delivers real results to ordinary people and their families. 
The good work has already started.
Peter Mackay recently announced that we will help P.E.I. renovate your magnificent confederation centre of the arts
– A place where Islanders welcome the world.
Last month, our government approved up to $11.4 million to support P.E.I.’s growing expertise in bioscience, nutriscience and health research.
And earlier today I joined with Pat and representatives of the other Atlantic Provinces to announce a $10 million injection of new funding for the federal
– Provincial agreement on international business development. 
The agreement is designed to boost exports from your region to the rest of the world.
And all these investments are focussed on the future.
And they mesh perfectly with the agenda set by your government in its recent budget.
Particularly the heavy emphasis your provincial treasurer, Mitch Murphy, put on education and innovation.
As a fellow Conservative, I was also happy to see your government is cutting taxes and being responsible with taxpayers’ money.
Well done, Premier.
You have been a steady hand at the helm of this province and it is moving forward under your leadership. 
Whatever the leader of the Opposition says, Islanders know good government when they get it!
And, let me just say as well, friends, that your Premier works hard not just here, but on your interests in Ottawa.
I keep hearing about how many times I’ve met Premier Charest, but I can tell you I’ve had more conversations, via the telephone, with Premier Binns, than with any other Premier.
As you know, the Premier has never ceased to remind me, during the election and since, about how the previous government tried to shaft P.E.I. on this year’s equalization.
We have the federal budget coming down Tuesday, so I can only tell you, if you don’t like the result, you can’t blame Pat for not trying, you can only blame me.
Of course, if you like the budget, you can certainly give me some of the credit as well!
Friends, when Islanders see we are on the same track as their provincial government,
– I’m confident they will join with other Canadians to elect a Conservative government in Ottawa.
Why am I so sure?
Because Canadians want change. And on January 23rd, they voted for it.
They said good riddance to 13 years of Liberal waste, mismanagement and corruption.
They said; “give us government that’s honest, effective and accountable.”
Government that will cut taxes and help ordinary working families.
That will make our communities safer.
That will improve access to medical care.
That will keep the Canada we love strong, united, independent and free.
My friends, that’s what Canadians asked for.
And that’s what they’re going to get.
We’re going to do it by turning over a new leaf. 
And a great deal of success has already been achieved.
One of our biggest steps forward to date was our announcement yesterday of a historic agreement with the United States that puts an end to the longstanding, crippling softwood lumber dispute.
Under this deal:
Canada will get stable access to the U.S. market.
• Canadian producers will get unrestricted access under current market conditions – which at current prices means neither quota nor tariff. 
• We will receive a minimum $4 billion U.S. through return of duties. 
• And we get flexible arrangements for all of our provinces and regions.
So this is clearly a good deal for Canada.
While the Premiers of B.C., Ontario, and Quebec – all of them Liberals - signed on to the deal, the federal Liberal leader huffed and puffed in the house yesterday.
He was stung by the brutal fact that our government was able to do in 3 months what the Liberals couldn’t do during the last 5 years.
Frankly, I’d be upset too if I were the Liberal leader.
Since for all their efforts the only thing they had to show was a lot of rhetoric - and agreements that never got signed.
Ones that didn’t come even close to the one we concluded.
And arrangements condemned by the maritime lumber bureau because the Liberals had lost the historic exemption of Atlantic Canada from American duties 

– An exemption that our government has succeeded in re-establishing for Atlantic Canada.
That’s why he so mad.
Because he knows his party has nothing to offer.
But enough of this.
Let the Liberals carp.
Let the Liberals complain.
We’ll just carry on the way we have from our first day in office.
Delivering good government and real results for Canadians.
Of course, the centre piece of our efforts to turn over a new leaf in Ottawa is our throne speech action plan focussed on our five priorities
First we’re going to clean up the mess in Ottawa.
That’s why the first piece of legislation we tabled in Parliament this month was the Federal Accountability Act.
It will toughen the rules governing lobbyists.
It will reform the financing of federal political parties.
It will give more power to independent officers of Parliament such as the Auditor General.
It will clean up federal advertising, contracting, polling, appointments and procurement.
And, when things do go wrong, it will give whistleblowers the iron-clad protection they need.
That’s how we’re going to give Canadians the good, clean government they want and deserve.
And that’s how we’re going to make sure an outrage like the sponsorship scandal never happens again.
But political corruption isn’t Canada’s only crime problem.
So far, Islanders have been spared much of the violent drug, gang and gun crime that increasingly plagues mainland cities.
But theft is a growing problem on the Island.
And, as we all know, if you don’t deal with the small stuff, serious crime soon follows.
Justice Minister Vic Toews will soon introduce legislation that will get tough on crime.
It will increase mandatory minimum prison sentences for gun crimes and end the use of conditional sentences, 
– I.e. we will end so-called house arrests for serious and violent crimes.
Criminals will be sent the following message:
Under our new national government, you do a serious crime, you will do serious time.
But tougher sentences are only part of the solution.
This government is committed to putting more police officers on our streets and providing new resources for border guards.
And we will also work with our partners – including other levels of government, police and social agencies – to nurture stable families and healthy communities.
That’s the best way to help young people from getting involved in crime in the first place.
Next Tuesday, our new government will table its first budget.
And we will be reducing taxes.
We think Canadians pay too much tax.
And, as we promised in the election, we will be immediately reducing the GST from 7% to 6% - and to 5% over the course of our mandate.
This move will leave hundreds of dollars a year – thousands over time – in the pockets of hard-working Canadians – where it belongs.
The opposition may not like it, but just imagine the GST savings for young families buying a new home or car.
Our plan will assist seniors on fixed incomes, many of whom would have received no benefit at all under the liberals` so-called tax- reduction plan.
Make no mistake, my friends, in our government, every single household will experience tax relief, and every household will be better off!
My friends, we will help families in terms of childcare 
– With a yearly allowance of $1,200 for every child under the age of six and with a true program to create childcare places.
We’re going to strengthen families by increasing the childcare options available to parents.
Because we know that every family is different and a single approach can’t respond to the needs of each.
That’s why we are going to give parents $1,200 per year for each child under the age of six.
That’s why we’re going to work with business, community organizations and provincial governments to create 125,000 new daycare spaces over the next five years.
You know, the Liberals want Canadians to believe that the choice facing them is between our program and theirs.
But that’s a false choice. For their plan is no plan at all. 
After 13 years, there never actually were any free, universally-accessible, readily-available Liberal childcare spaces as they like to claim.
Which means that for parents, the choice is clear:
Our government is offering $1,200 per year. The Liberals are offering zero.
Our government has a real plan to create 125,000 at-work daycare spaces. 
The Liberals plan consists of nothing more than shifting day care money to advocates, bureaucrats and politicians.
Our plan delivers direct financial assistance. Their plan does not.
Our plan will create daycare spaces. Their plan did not.
Canadians want real childcare choice and that is what this government will deliver.
Let me just finish by saying that I appreciate that P.E.I. has committed not to claw back the new childcare benefit from other social assistance. 
I know, Pat and Mitch, your budget is tight, but this is the right move for Island families.
Rounding out our five priorities is our commitment to work with the provinces to develop a Patient Wait Times Guarantee.
Canadians will thus have access to critical medical care they need, when they need it.
And in fact your provincial government is already moving on this.
Treasurer Murphy’s budget contains funding to shorten wait times for hip and knee replacements.
That’s a good start.
But more remains to be done by all of us. And the courts are increasingly demanding that our healthcare monopoly deliver the service it has promised.
After all, you’ve paid your taxes. You deserve to get treatment.
That’s why we will work with the provinces on a Patient Wait Times Guarantee - to ensure all Canadians get the critical care they need, when they need it.
My friends, in conclusion we have made commitments and we will move on them.
My friends, Canadians have seen the past.
And they’re tired of it.
So it’s up to us to get on with the job, to fix the messes and to deliver a bright new future.
We know what we have to do.
We know what we want to achieve.
But in a minority Parliament, more than ever, we’re going to need your help.
We need your help to make sure next time P.E.I. has a strong voice in our government – not just the strong voice of Pat Binns – but a strong voice inside our government.
We need your help so that we can continue to provide leadership on Canada’s values and interests in the world
– On softwood lumber and our economic interests, on national defence and national sovereignty, on Afghanistan and our role in the world. 
And we need your help, whether it is on taxes or crime, on health care or childcare,
– Or on cleaning up government and establishing accountability, 
– To ensure the real voice of ordinary working Canadians and their families is heard.
And we need your help on the island and right across this country - writing, e-mailing, faxing and telephoning your MPs to tell them to get with the plan.
Thank you all, once again, for coming here tonight, For the work you’ve done to get us this far and for this show of enthusiastic support for all we are trying to achieve.
Thank you. God bless Canada!