00
Speech by the Prime Minister Ive Sanader at the 63rd General Assembly of the United Nations, New York, September 26, 2008
Dear Mr. President,
Dear representatives,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
First I would like to congratulate HE. Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann assuming the chairmanship of the General Assembly during the 63rd Session. I would also like to thank HE. Srdjan Kerim for the excellent conduct of the chairmanship of the General Assembly over the past year.
While once again gathering together to address the most significant problems on the global agenda, a session opening the General Assembly reminds us of the common vision of the United Nations as the embodiment of the nation of nations.
It reminds us of the continuing need for an effective multilateral effort to address global challenges, to maintain and build peace in conflict zones and post-conflict societies, and to seek solutions within the framework of international rule of law, through the promotion of freedom, democracy, development and respect for humanrights.
We also have the opportunity to make a balance sheet of our achievements as well as to undermine our commitment to the goals of world peace and prosperity.
It is a commitment that Croatia and the Croatian people expressed and accepted before the country's independence. It is a commitment to strengthening international cooperation through effective multilateral organizations to promote peace and security, enabling development and eradicating poverty, protecting the environment, curbing illnesses and promoting public health.
By renewing our commitment to these goals, this year marks the 120th anniversary of the birth of Andrew Stampar, one of the founders of the World Health Organization and the first president of its assembly.
In that inaugural speech in 1948, Stampar clearly stated that the Organization must become "a pioneer of world peace and a promoter of understanding among peoples".
Stampar's words also apply to the wider family of UN institutions. His words bear witness to the continued commitment of Croatia and its citizens to promoting meIRA through international cooperation.
Since the time of acquiring independence, the highest Croatian officials are addressing this Assembly every year to renew this noble commitment.
Even in difficult times, while our perenniality was endangered and there was no collective security guarantee, they came to New York to express the commitment of Croatia to the values ​​contained in the Charter of the United Nations.
00
Croatia has since gone a long way, but our determination to achieve the principles of the UN Charter has remained equally strong.
We have developed a stable democracy and a growing economy, but we have not forgotten the brave people who fought and defended our independence, as well as the people of good will that helped us, when we needed it most, with the UN flag.
With this conviction and determination, with a sincere sense of gratitude and willingness to cooperate, I address today to this Assembly to share with you Croatian views on the most important problems faced by the international community.
In this poccasion for the first time in Croatia to deal with new perspectives: elected members of the Security Council.
Membership in the Security Council is not only a great honor for Croatia, but also the great responsibility we have been prepared for over the past years.
Over the last decade, we have completed the transformation and profiled as a center of stability, security and cooperation in South East Europe.
Today, Croatia is at the lobby of the European Union. We are determined to complete accession negotiations in 2009 and end this complex process of deep political, economic and social reforms.
Our European vocation has led us in the transition period and it will continue to lead us after joining the European Union.
Equal importance is given to our membership in NATO and we expect to become an alliance member until the next summit in spring 2009, when the 60th anniversary of NATO will be celebrated as well.
By implementing the reforms, we have transformed our country from helping users in international peace and security. Daysas Croatian forces are engaged in 13 UN peace operations on four continents.
Members of our armed forces are also involved in the NATO operation in Afghanistan and the EU operation in Chad, in accordance with UN Security Council decisions.
In all these areas of conflict, our members of the armed forces have demonstrated their commitment and professionalism. However, their most valuable contribution is the readiness to convey Croatian experiences in overcoming the consequences of the war on the path to reconciliation, co-operation and development.
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
As a member of the Security Council, Croatia will continue to act as a responsible partner, committed to a common effort to maintain and build peace through the promotion of human rights and democracy, the struggle to eradicate poverty and injustice, and promote effective multilateralism.
Croatia has a sense of responsibility, solidarity and good faith. We believe that an effective multilateral activity, including acting in cooperation with regional organizations, is ourwhich is the best guarantee to preserve these values.
While in some troubled parts of the world we can see progress in promoting these values, in some others new conflicts are emerging, as in Georgia. In this connection, we welcome the six-point agreement reached at the beginning of August with the mediation of the EU Presidency, as well as the implementation of the September agreement.
We are aware of the fact that failure to solve these problems in the multilateral context of cooperation could lead back to the old paradigm of confrontation. At the same time, the lack of courage could undermine the democratic achievements that have come about since the end of the Cold War era.
These achievements should be preserved as they derive from the underlying principles of the UN Charter.
It should not be forgotten that the UN is the common fundamental values ​​of freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance and respect for human rights. In this regard, the suffering of people in Sudan, Darfur, Somalia and Myanmar is reminded that between the goals set by this Organization and the Realitiesthere is still a gap.
Croatia welcomes the joint international efforts to prevent flagrant violations of international humanitarian law and human rights - efforts being made through international mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court, which conducts justice in situations where national governments themselves can not or do not want to address the problems.
Human rights and the rule of law are the cornerstones of a more peaceful, just and prosperous world. This year marks the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. As a member of the Security Council, Croatia is committed to respecting these rights, especially in the most vulnerable segments of the population: civilians, especially women and children.
We are pleased that the Council this year adopted a significant resolution on the disturbing appearance of sexual violence as a method of warfare.
We also continue to work to prevent the participation of children in armed conflicts and we are confident that the real situation on the ground requires a stronger engagement of the Council.
From that, iFor many other reasons, Croatia has decided to submit a candidacy for membership to the Human Rights Council in the period from 2010 to 2013.
Mr President,
Excellencies,
We live in a world that significantly redefined the traditional concept of threat to international peace and security. In a world that is increasingly interconnected, global threats take on different shapes. Terrorism, poverty, disease, climate change, environmental endangering, and food price increases require us to cooperate because only a common vision and collective action, carried out in the spirit of solidarity and responsibility, can respond to these challenges.
Terrorism undermines the fundamental values ​​of the contemporary world and represents a serious threat to our security, the fundamental principles of democratic societies and the rights and freedoms of our citizens.
Terrorist acts are in their essence criminal activities and can not be justified at all. Croatia appreciates and fully supports all efforts in the global fight against terrorism within the UNN-system, and beyond it.
Since the beginning of this year, Croatia has been chairing the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee, which was founded immediately after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks directed against the United States and the entire democratic world. We have taken this responsibility with the utmost seriousness and are working to make the Committee focus on achieving concrete results and realistic goals.
I would also like to reiterate the importance that Croatia attaches to the Global Strategy for Combating Terrorism as the primary document in the global fight against terrorism. Croatia is active both at the regional level - chaired by CODEXTER in the Council of Europe.
In overcoming global threats and challenges, initiatives such as the Alliance of Civilizations can have an inspiring role in raising the level of mutual respect, understanding and cooperation between nations and peoples beyond the boundaries of cultures and religions. Since the main objective of the Alliance is to oppose intolerance, religious fundamentalism and extremismCroatia has been happy to accept participation in this growing group of people.
Our dialogue and co-operation should also be more focused on combating poverty and establishing a global partnership for development. In this respect, Croatia welcomes the leadership of the UN Secretary-General in calling for action to help "the poorest among the poor", the so-called "poorest among the poor". "Billion to the bottom".
We also believe that it is of crucial importance that governments support the fulfillment of commitments under the Millennium Development Goals. Specific arrangements between donor and recipient countries should be implemented in the spirit of a human approach focused on issues of health, education, environment and eradication of poverty.
In this regard, we recognize the importance of mobilizing financial resources for development as well as their meaningful application in developing countries.
The Monterrey agreement remains on the basis of a global partnership for development. Croatia believes in the positive outcome of the conference to be held in Dolate later this year. In this context, Croatia will respect the obligations arising from its status as a candidate country for EU membership.
Through its transitional process, Croatia has grown from a recipient country to a country whose experience and resources allow it to become an international participant in providing assistance.
Participating in various UN funds and programs, Croatia has confirmed its capacity to support UN activities in various areas. We will continue to help those who need it.
At the same time as increasing its share in global progress, Croatia takes on a prominent role on the international scene and remains actively involved in the care of stability in South East Europe.
Our membership in the UN Security Council and the final phase of NATO and EU accession have not distracted our attention from the region. On the contrary, they allowed us to underestimate their efforts to preserve stability and peace.
Through initiatives such as the Regional Co-operation Council (RCC), headquartered in Sarajevo and the Uglewith Croatian diplomat Hido Biščević as the first Secretary-General, we are actively participating in regional stability.
However, there is still unfinished business in our neighboring region. Let me mention one: Bosnia and Herzegovina. The equality of all three constituent and sovereign peoples, Croats, Bosniaks and Serbs, is the foundation for the stability of this country.
The Republic of Croatia is ready to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina and other countries in the region through an active policy of cooperation.
Such co-operation opens the way for long-term security and prosperity in Southeast Europe. Croatia will continue to support the Euro-Atlantic aspirations of all its neighbors.
On that path, Croatia will renew its resolve in the care of peace, democracy and tolerance, while respecting our commitment to the United Nations Charter.
Last year, precisely from this booth, His Holiness, Pope Benedict XVI, reminded us that "the fundamental principles of the Organization - the desire for peace, the quest for justice, respect for the dignity of a person,humanitarian cooperation and assistance - reflect the righteous aspirations of the human spirit and represent the ideals on which international relations should be based.
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
We should always keep these ideals in mind while continuing our joint work to realize the full potential of the United Nations in creating a world where there will be more peace, prosperity and democracy.
Thank you.
