 HYPERLINK "http://valitsus.ee/et/valitsus/peaminister-ja-ministrid/andrus-ansip/peaministri-koned-ja-seisukohad/42/peaminister-andrus-ansipi-k%C3%B5ne-stanfordi-%C3%BClikooli-hooveri-instituudis" http://valitsus.ee/et/valitsus/peaminister-ja-ministrid/andrus-ansip/peaministri-koned-ja-seisukohad/42/peaminister-andrus-ansipi-k%C3%B5ne-stanfordi-%C3%BClikooli-hooveri-instituudis
http://valitsus.ee/en/government/14361/speech-by-prime-minister-andrus-ansip-at-the-hoover-institution,-stanford-university
Valitsuse kommunikatsioonibüroo, 30.11.2007 18:10
Peaminister Andrus Ansipi kõne Stanfordi Ülikooli Hooveri Instituudis
[Speech by Prime Minister Andrus Ansip at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University]
How a Former Soviet Satellite Became One of the World’s Most Free Economies Doctor Raisian, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen, Dear Friends, Let me begin by saying how pleased I am to be here. It is great to be back in California. I first visited the United States back in 1989 – at a time when Estonia was still under Soviet occupation, but change was already in the air. The United States and, in particular California, made a deep impression on me then and still does today. I am deeply honored by the Hoover Institution’s invitation to speak at this retreat. The Hoover Institution is not only one of the world’s foremost research centers, but it also has some very special links to Estonia. For years, the Hoover Institution has preserved a unique collection of documents on Estonian and Baltic history. This collection, held in the famous Hoover Institution Archives, includes valuable documents from the first years of Estonia’s independence. It also includes rare materials belonging to Estonian diplomats, refugees and diaspora from the post-World War Two period. The Hoover Institution has also published documents of importance to Estonia. Toivo Raun’s ‘Estonia and the Estonians’ first published in 1991 by the Hoover press was, and still is, one of the best surveys ever written on Estonia. It is still widely referred to today. But most importantly, the Hoover Institution and Estonia are bound by a common set of values. Individual, economic, and political freedom, private enterprise, and representative government were fundamental to the vision of this great Institution's founder – President Herbert Hoover. In Estonia, we too attach great value to these principles. Ladies and gentlemen, Freedom means something very special to Estonians. Freedom for us means the right to decide over our own future, the right to run our own affairs – both in the political and economic sense. We know what it means to live without freedom. And we know that freedom is not free. It is easy to recognize when freedom is lacking. And yet it is quite difficult to measure it when it exists. Fortunately a number of independent organizations do a good job in ranking countries according to the level of freedom in their political and economic sectors. Reporters Without Borders, for example, measures the level of press freedom in countries around the world. According to their latest index, the situation in Europe and Estonia is positive. Estonia ranks third in the world in press freedom behind Iceland and Norway. The more well-known Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom ranks Estonia as one of the world’s most free economies. Indeed, according to the Heritage Foundation’s latest survey, Estonia places 12th in the world – no small feat for a country that less than two decades ago was forced to live under a state-planned economic system. How did we manage to turn around our economy? First, we adopted a very open, free-market approach. Rather than try to fight globalization, we opened up our markets to the outside world allowing foreign companies to enter and compete in Estonia. We didn’t protect our national industries or agricultural sector with artificial tariffs and barriers. On the contrary – we welcomed outside trade and competition. Making the shift to complete openness wasn’t entirely painless. But we realized that it was indispensable to transforming and re-integrating our economy with the west. As Professor Razeen Sally of the London School of Economics and Doctor Magnus Feldmann of Harvard University point out ‘unilateral free trade became Estonia’s equivalent of the Nike strategy -Just do it. It quickly became Estonia’s distinctive international trademark, Estonia’s answer to Finland’s so-called ‘Nokia effect.’ Paradoxically, Russia’s energy embargo of the early nineties and double trade tariffs imposed on Estonia helped speed up our economic re-orientation. With restricted access to the Russian market, Estonian entrepreneurs started to look increasingly to the West - mainly to Nordic and European markets. By 1993, the European Union was already our largest trade partner, well before our accession to the EU in 2004. Today, 72% of our trade is with other EU member states. In contrast, Russia accounts for only 11% of our external trade volumes. Estonia’s high ranking in economic freedom can also be explained by our decision to adopt a very simple and transparent taxation system. Indeed, the flat tax system is one of the foundations of our economic system. Simple and uncomplicated, the flat tax is easy for people to understand and allows the state to collect taxes effectively. As of the year 2000, corporate profits are not taxed, except for distributed dividends. These dividends are taxed at the same rate as personal income. The current tax rate in Estonia is 22% and it has been agreed on the political level that the rate will fall to 18%. The flat tax is an important part of our economic success. We like it and are glad that it is gaining ground elsewhere. But our tax policy alone did not bring investments and trade to Estonia. We also worked hard on creating a favorable climate for investors. We established clear property rights, predictable policies and transparent decision-making. Entrepreneurs everywhere want to know that their investments will not only make a profit, but that they are also safe.
Another important factor is our unusually high readiness to embrace new technologies and IT solutions. We started to adopt e-solutions early on without any interference from the government. Today 98% of all bank transactions are made via the Internet – the highest rate in the world. 86% of all tax declarations are submitted via the Internet. And we are the most advanced European Union country in terms of availability and quality of public e-services. We have an e-government, an e-tax board and even e-elections.
All of this makes us innovative but also vulnerable. As we learned earlier this year, openness in the IT field has a downside. The widely reported cyber attacks against Estonia in May of this year were aimed at seriously disrupting everyday life in Estonia. They were well- organized, coordinated and premeditated. Fortunately, our IT sector is well-developed and Estonian experts acted quickly. Thanks to effective and rapid countermeasures, were able to neutralize the attacks. Yet we learned a valuable lesson – cyber security is a new and important security dimension that needs to be dealt with actively at the national and international level.
Lastly, we managed to transform our economy from a highly controlled system to a modern, free, market-based one because we acted quickly and decisively. We didn’t wait for outsiders to make decisions for us or to pressure us to reform. We set our own course, we did our own homework. There are a number of countries who shared the same fate as us and started from the same low point of development but have not progressed as much. We didn’t hesitate.
Rapid reforms had a significant impact on Estonian society forcing people to make some tough decisions and even tougher sacrifices. But overall support for the changes remained high. People were eager to distance themselves from the Soviet era and do everything differently. People wanted and supported change.
Ladies and gentlemen, Estonia’s development model has proven to be successful. Major domestic reforms in Estonia have been completed. But I must stress that our work is not yet done. Before the Second World War, Estonia was economically on par with Finland. Today, the balance is clearly in Finland’s favor. Thanks to sixteen years of hard work, we are catching up. But we still have some way to go to reach Finland’s high level of development. Indeed, economic convergence with Finland and other prosperous EU countries still has to be achieved. Currently Estonia’s GDP is 72% of the EU average. But in the not too distant future we would like to join the club of rich European nations. We don’t intend to rest on our laurels. The same argument also applies to our security situation. Today we are safely in NATO and the European Union. But this does not mean that we don’t need to continue working on consolidating our security. Indeed, EU and NATO membership means more, not less, international responsibilities. It means making an even bigger contribution to international security. It also means more work on building strong bilateral relations with like-minded countries. Before we joined NATO and the European Union, some in Estonia predicted that the need for bilateral relations with individual countries would diminish. In actuality – they are more important than ever. Bilateral relations even with the best of allies – including the United States - need regular attention and should never be taken for granted. The United States stood by us in the darkest of times by refusing to recognize Estonia’s forceful incorporation into the Soviet Union. Indeed, the US non-recognition policy helped keep the hope of freedom alive among the Estonian people. The role that the US has played in our overall development is very much on our minds as we prepare to celebrate 90 years of independent statehood. We have come a long way thanks to your support and commitment!
Hoover Institution, 30 November 2007
