Statement by Prime Minister of Georgia on Independence Day:
Your Excellency Mr. President,
Your Excellency Mr. Speaker,
Your Holiness Catholicos-Patriarch,
Honorable members of the government,
Honorable diplomats,
Dear guests,
Our admirable soldiers,
Greetings,
Happy Independence Day of Georgia, May 26! This year, our country celebrates the 25th anniversary of the restoration of our independence. I congratulate all of Georgia, all our fellow citizens on this glorious occasion!
I congratulate our international partners who have made a tremendous contribution to the consolidation of our country's independence!
I especially congratulate you, Georgian soldiers!
This day is especially exciting for recruits. Today you took an oath and pledged to your homeland, joining the ranks of our country's armed forces. 
I am convinced that you will diligently fulfill your duties in serving our homeland, never forgetting the price our country has paid to reclaim independence and those who have sacrificed their lives for Georgia's freedom.
Serving one's country is the greatest honor. Undoubtedly, you, without exception, will become loyal soldiers of our country, always keeping in mind that you are the guardians of Georgia.
I wish a Happy Independence Day to the Georgian Armed Forces, our faithful soldiers, especially those participating in international missions who are keeping guard to protect the Georgian state and global peace. I am grateful to them for their loyalty to our country and for proving to the world that Georgian soldiers exemplify courage and selflessness.
Over the past 25 years, Georgia has been through much and has made great sacrifices. I honor the memory of our heroes who have fallen for their homeland. 
Dear friends!
Our homeland has seen much pain and success, but this day, our achievements and prospects, guarantee that we will live in a better, unified, and strong Georgia. Tomorrow promises our country great victories and success for the benefit of all our citizens.
I am convinced that we will attain these achievements together with our Abkhazian and Ossetian brothers and sisters, and we will succeed in overcoming pain and join efforts to continue on our path to a better future!
Dear friends, soldiers of our country,
Once again, Happy Independence Day. Please accept my sincere wishes for peace, and may God protect you and all of Georgia!
