Country: India
Leader: Narendra Modi
Type: Campaign
Name of the speech: Varanasi rally speech
Date: Dec 20, 2013
Source:


Bharat Mata ki.  Present on the stage National President of Bhartiya Janata Party and the son of this soil Sri Rajnath Singh Ji, our  guide  and senior party leader, respected Murali Manohar Joshi Ji, Uttar Pradesh BJP Sriman Laxmikant Vajpayee Ji, Sri Kalaraj Mishra Ji, senior leader respected Sri Kalyan Singh Ji, Sri Om Praksh Singh Ji, Sri Amit Bhai Shah Ji, Rameshwar Chaurasia Ji, Sri Trivendra Ji Rawat, respected Lalji Tandon Ji, Sri Keshari Nath Tripathi Ji, Sri Ramapati Ji, Sri Surya Pratap Ji, all the senior party leaders present on the dais, I welcome all of you who all came from far fringes of Kashi area and I bow to sea of humanity arrived in large numbers here.

I come from the land of Somnath and am here to take blessings of Baba Vishwanath. Brothers and sisters, this is happening perhaps the first time in the history of Indian democracy when there is such an atmosphere much ahead of the elections. Brothers and Sisters, it all happens during the election time. Political parties become  more active-politics of allegations and counter allegations-parties tries to expand their political bases. But It is first time that the common man in Hindustan becomes aggressive and keen to uproot the government in Delhi. And I can see - the elections in 2014 will not be fought by any political party or the individual leadership, the elections will be fought by the people of the country--by the every electorate of this nation.

Brothers and Sisters, in the past the and future too - India's description, without Ganga can not be complete. For others Ganga can be a river, but for us it is our mother, not just a river-Our Mother. Ganga isn't mere a flow of water, it depicts our culture. Brothers and sisters, many proposals on cleaning and preserving the Ganga have come up. Crores were spent. I ask you, is the money flowing with the Ganga? The government could have at least stopped the deteriorating water quality of Ganges, with this wealth, but it has been unable to. Those who can't handle Ganga, how will they manage the country.

The UPA govt made a scheme to clean the Ganga with lot enthusiasm. A lot of campaigning was done and people thought something will be done - People have had faith in them and brought them in to power. But my dear brother and sisters from Uttar Pradesh - I wanted to tell the nation from this sacred land of Ganga, that in the last five years no step was taken by the government sitting in Delhi, except holding three meetings.

I request the Central government and the Prime Minister to share detailed accounts with people and answer them on how much were spent on the project to clean Ganga, The Congress has used the Ganga for vote-bank politics since the days of Rajiv Gandhi.

Thousands of crore rupees has been taken out of the treasury - the people of the country demands to know what have you done to restore river Ganga to pristine conditions? When, how and - yes for whom?

Brothers and sisters - you tell me that on the issue of Ganga - in the name of this river the citizens have been made fool of - they have been kept in the dark - they have been cheated. Brothers and sisters should you re-elect such sinners who have fouled up such a pious project?

Speak up - should you elect to government the ones who have played with the sanctity of the Ganges - those who have misled you?

Brothers and sisters don't make this mistake - the Ganga is not polluted only because of pollutants in Uttar Pradesh - actually to cleanse the Ganga you have to clean Delhi - you have to clean Lucknow - then the Ganga will be cleaned. As long as these people are in power there is no chance of cleaning the Ganga. These days people ask me - mostly people who want Congress to survive - so that they can survive. These defenders of Congress ask - Modi ji what shall you do? I shall get things done and show you. And people who ask me what I can do - make time for a day and come to Gujarat - come to the soil of Ahmedabad and stand by the Sabarmati riverfront. The same Sabarmati - the one which has the name of Mahatma Gandhi associated - had become almost like a drain - come today and see - Sabarmati is full to the top with the waters of Narmada.

Brothers and sisters - tell me do you believe that Ganga can be cleaned - if Sabarmati could have been cleaned - couldn't the same be done to Ganga? If Sabarmati can influence life in Gujarat cant the Ganga influence lives in India?

Brothers and sisters we do not make false promises - Brothers and sisters of UP, we do not promise we have made up our mind on action - the land is tired of promises - words and advices - the country wants action. We would like to assure you that we will make good our words.

Brothers and sisters some people think that Uttar Pradesh is crucial to politics of India because without help from UP nobody can come to power - brothers and sisters - such thoughts insult UP - is UP useful only there for adding up numbers - is it useful only to clobber together a government? My thoughts are not that limited - it's not the question of governments - if you want stability in India - it cannot happen without a stable UP. If India is to develop - UP must be developed too - if you have to root out unemployment from India you cannot do it without rooting out unemployment in UP. If India is hungry - it is UP that appeased that hunger. We must not associate UP only with the number of MPs it sends - UP can become the destiny changer for India (Bhagya Vidhata) - UP can attain heights of development and be an example for India. As such for the BJP- UP is not a political playground - for us, UP is the ground where the story of India's future can be scripted.

Brothers and sisters I have a firm belief in the strength of the people of this place -It is people for this land that once dreamt of Ram Rajya . If people are not skilled, how would Ram Rajya be possible? The ability, tradition and culture to usher in Ram Rajya was - and is exists in the people of UP. You have a proud history - so what is the trouble? The trouble is that you have not elected the right government and leader. If you choose the right leader then I firmly believe that you have it in you to act as the engine of development in the country.

Brothers and sisters The farmers of UP - alone - can - like they did when Lal Bahadur Shastri coined 'Jai Jawan Jai Kisan'- filled the food bowls of India - farmers from UP - can single handedly feed the whole of Europe. But look at the state of things - leaders and government - the farmers who once fed India doesn't have enough on his plate. The farmer - producing rice - will feed some poor - farmer ploughs his field to feed all - even animals and birds. But brothers and sisters when farmers come to know that his rice and whet are getting spoiled on railway platforms - it hurts their feelings. A farmer's real pleasure is in knowing that his labour had fed hungry mouths. This is something the government in Delhi can't seem to realise. The Supreme Court orders disbursement of grains amongst poor but the government refuses to comply but sell it in subsidized rates to liquor manufacturers. Doesn't it hurt the feelings of our farmers? I am flabbergasted can any government act like this? This is an insult to our agrarians and farmers and a cruel joke on the plight of the poor.

Brothers and sisters elections come and they start preparing - you know there are some students whose faith increases proportionately as exams approach - the Congress acts similarly - as soon as election comes - the poor come into focus. If they had some real love and respect for the poor - some sympathy for them then this would not have been the state of affairs for the poor of the country. Some forty five years power has been centered around a single family - they are responsible for the state of the poor.

Brothers and sisters - I don't have to travel somewhere to see poverty - my childhood was spent in poverty. I am stunned at the amount of contempt they have for the poor in their mind - one UPA leader even said that a tea vendor cannot become the PM of India.  Tell me is vending tea - a crime - is standing up on your own two feet - being self sufficient - is it a crime - a sin - a taint? I am flabbergasted - these leaders who speak of poor - how can a tea seller become a PM? If the people want then even a labourer can become a PM - a shoeshine boy can become PM too. Based on my own principles let me tell you all - I am proud of selling tea - I haven't sold the country. This is how they make fun of the poor and their poverty. And one of their leaders - well he says - poverty is nothing but a state of mind. When you are unable to light the stove in the evenings and hungry children cry themselves to sleep - then you know poverty - what do they know? Small children work to feed their parents - but they -   people who mock the poor. This arrogance of those people who consider poor is in their pockets and the welfare of poor is not going to happen and I want to tell the poor, it will be our first duty to throw away those people who have exploited you till now.

Just now Rajnath Ji was saying that he is pained to hear that leaders from Congress call BJP leader thieves. Congress can say anything. If we collect all that Congress leaders are saying and print it than we will be shocked. Is this their sansakara? Is this the language they use?

But I want to tell Congress leaders, you call us thieves. We accept your allegation. Yes, we are thieves; we have stolen the sleep of the Congress. We have stolen the peace of the Congress. Now we will not let the people sit in peace who have plundered this country since independence.

Brothers and Sisters, I want to ask you, I want to ask elders here who spend their lives with problems - do they want to give this India to your children? Do you want to force your children to live in poverty? Do you want that your children remain unemployed? Do you want to press your children to leave their homes and live in slums of the cities?

Brothers and Sisters, a few days ago a Muslim from here wrote to me. He said - I have to share a problem with you. You are coming to Varanasi, please mention one of our problems in your speech. He wrote that he lives in a Muslim colony and there are small power loom factories producing Silk Sarees. He said, he is unable to sleep in night, problems are there, please find a solution. He expressed his anguish. Brothers and Sisters, this Banarasi Saree not only protects modesty of our women, it also has a potential to save dignity of Indian economy.

Such a big industry, it has a potential to employ lakhs of people but they have destroyed it. The friend who wrote to me may be here in the crowd or listening to my speech on television. Brothers, there's a solution to this problem. Kashi and Surat share old bond. There is hearsay, death in Kashi and food in Surat. Surat too, like Kashi has big power loom industry. At one point in time, if you walk on the roads in Surat, either in the morning or evening, the noise of power loom even subsides the noise of your scooter. Brothers and Sister, we started a campaign and within ten years we technologically upgraded the industry. We established many big industrial complexes outside Surat city.  Brothers and Sister, noiseless machines are available in the market these days. Today, due to up gradation of the technology we have been able to improve the quality as well as quantity of the production. Brothers and Sisters, this can be achieved in Varanasi as well. Those who ask me what the vision of Modi is? This is the truth, go and see it for yourself.

Brothers and Sisters, if intentions are noble and I feel if the Saree industry of Varanasi would have been technologically upgraded than it alone could have provided employment to lakhs of youth in the country. They would have had not been forced to leave. But policies of the government are such that they import yarn from China but do not care about the livelihood of Saree manufacturers of Varanasi. Their policies are such that has led to this situation.

Brothers and Sisters, possibly there is no village in the Poorvanchal from where youth are not living in Gujarat. Tell me friends, why this situation came that youths here have to leave their villages, leave their parents? If Uttar Pradesh would have developed they would not have been forced to leave their villages, their homes, their friends, their old parents.

Brothers and Sisters, due to unemployment today youth are staring at a bleak future. He is distressed, where to go, whose hands to hold, who will save him.

Tell me friends, what is the first thing that comes to your mind after seeing job advertisement? The first thing that comes to your mind is recommendation. Didn't you look for recommendation? There isn't guarantee of getting a job without recommendation. There is no possibility of getting a job without paying a bribe. Isn't this dishonesty? Is there solution to this problem or not? I have a solution. Those protectors of the Congress who question about my vision, I wasn't to say them this. Friends, once we had to recruit 13000 teachers in Gujarat. 1-2 lakh applications are normal for such a big recruitment. What we did, we gave an advertisement and registered all the candidates online, and with the help of computer we short listed 13000 candidates with highest marks. I passed the order to recruit them. Brothers, if decisions are made on the basis of merit and there is no interview than this whole issue of corruption and recommendation can be solved. And the right person will get the job. I started this as a pilot project in Gujarat and we got success. No one has raised finger on the process. And I feel every youth, no matter how much he is educated he can't survive on his certificate. He is in constant search for a recommendation.

Brothers and Sisters youth need dignity. He wants to free himself from a life where he has to spread his hands for every need. The youth of my country can change the destiny of India. The government needs to trust the youth and I am here with this trust. I want to tell the youth of this country that there is no dearth of opportunities. Country needs manpower be it in agriculture, manufacturing or service sector. The youth of this country can make India an economic superpower.

My young friends, I am coming with a guarantee of your future. If we cannot guarantee the future of our youth then nothing can be done. Destiny of India is in the hand of her youth. Youth wants opportunity and BJP has come with a resolve to provide opportunity to the youth. Brothers and Sisters, People are uprooting the Congress and electing BJP governments and this is the proof that we have stood up to the expectations of the people.

Brothers and Sisters, I have been visiting various parts of Uttar Pradesh. The massive gathering I am witnessing everywhere gives me trust that the people of the country wants to uproot the government in Delhi. The people don't want to tolerate the government in Delhi. Brothers and Sisters, let's make a resolve to change the destiny of India. Congress free India would have to be created. Congress free India is the only guarantees of poverty free India. Congress free India is the guarantees of unemployment free India. To get rid of poverty, unemployment, starvation deaths, corruption we will have to free India of the Congress party and we are here with that dream.

Bharat Mata Ki Jai.