…Let me begin by saluting the great, faithful, Revolutionary, and loyal people of Sorayan and the surrounding villages.  Peace be upon you and your martyrs.  It was mentioned to me that the people of this region are faithful, loyal, and Revolutionary people.


In our eyes, the example of your martyrs, your soldiers and the heroes lined up in the battlefields of the Revolution, speaks for itself of your faithfulness and your Revolutionary attitudes.  I thank God the Almighty for giving us the opportunity to come and meet with some of our best countrymen today—dear, hardworking, pure, patient, and grateful people.  I am humbled before my God when I see that you left your farms, your work, and your lives unattended this morning to participate in this great gathering so that once again, together, we can renew our covenants with the Revolution and with Islam.  I thank you all.  You all know that your government—a government consolidated by the will of the people—only seeks to bring justice.  Justice means that the opportunities in this country must be provided in an equitable way for all the people all over our country.  Certainly, those who work harder deserve to have more chances.  Justice means prosperity for all the country, and not just building parts of the country while the rest remains in ruins.  It means that we should all progress together, hand in hand.  If there’s comfort, wealth, and progress, then it should be for all the people.


Another framework adopted by this government, is that of serving the people.  The state, the statesmen, and the officials should have no other goal in mind than helping and serving their fellow countrymen.  The leaders, the governors, the officials, the president and vice president, are dear to [he eyes of] the people as long as they keep on serving them.  A president, a minister, a governor, or a lawyer who locks himself up in his office and tries to rule from there, does not have any place in this government.  Our officials stand shoulder to shoulder with the people, rejoicing of their joy and mourning of their plight, and so it must be.  Those who seek a different course that isolates them from the people are not welcomed here and do not belong to a just government-of-the-people.  In this government, the priority is to seek and look after the hardworking people who live in the more remote and deprived parts of the country.


This is why the first trip we have made was to the province of South Khorasan.  A province that gathers the best and purest of our people, but yet in economic terms, is one of the most deprived regions our country.  Almost all the suburbs of this province are poor.  Nevertheless, thanks be to God, this area is more fertile than others in agriculture and I hope that together we can bring prosperity to this whole region.  A lot of problems have been brought to my attention, such as agricultural loans and subsidies.  Today, the government will hold a meeting in Birjand to review the difficulties facing your province.  Agricultural loans and subsidies are on top of the list and will be thoroughly discussed and examined.  Hopefully, we will be able to reach an honorable conclusion so that you will all be able to get back to your positive and productive work.  There is also the question of droughts and other problems.  I want to give you the assurance that we stand with you at all times.


We are working hard on reorganizing the banking system, as to make it more accessible to the people.  That way we will no more be faced with a situation in which some city-dweller takes out millions in loans and does not even pay interest on it, and no one goes after him.  Meanwhile, a farmer in a remote region who has to work hard and make sacrifices to provide us with foodstuff, takes out a meager amount of loan that will sustain him through a drought, and every day he receives new warnings [from the bank] that make his life unbearable.  The problem of water shortage was duly mentioned.  We have a plan to examine and assess the water resources, which we will as planned.  Nonetheless, in my opinion, the elders and more experienced ones among you who are acquainted with the weather conditions in this region can teach us a great deal about climate changes here.  They could help us by sharing their expertise, so we can know more about seasonal climate changes, or how often it rains, how frequent are droughts, and so on.  Such information could be extremely valuable for us.  I will ask the governor to put this on his agenda.  The government will pay for all the expenses and information will quickly be collected from the people.  Many of our nomadic tribes understand the weather conditions better than any of our meteorology equipments can.


However, this doesn’t mean that we don’t need technology; we need the most advance technology.  All of this is necessary, in addition to people’s knowledge about their habitat.  We hope that with your help we can find an optimal solution for the water supply in this region.  On our way here, we could easily discern the dry land and desert from your fertile lands.  One was dry and fruitless; the other had been made green and productive through your hard work.
From up there [in the airplane], I prayed that God Almighty would create the conditions for you determined people to expand your green frontiers by hundreds of kilometers, and that this government, shoulder to shoulder with the people and at their service, would be able to help them achieve it.  We will harness all the resources available to us for work, work, and work.  In this government, side issues as well as political squabbles and gambits between various groups and parties are nonexistent.  Almost every meeting held by the government is dedicated to the people from morning to night.  The ministers discuss the issues one by one, and make a decision accordingly, although it must be said that we find ourselves today in a very sensitive position.  After all, you all now that the past period [in our history], the dark Pahlavi period, was a period in which the people were pillaged [by the government], and innumerous injustices were inflicted upon them.


And then came the Revolution, quickly followed by the [Iran-Iraq] War, the Jihad, with outside and inside pressures which we finally overcame, and the wheels of our economy finally started to roll.  But we must put a stop to pork-barrel spending, unnecessary allocations, the wasting of our resources, and the misuse of our Treasury, so all our resources, our facilities, and our time will be dedicated to serving the people.  In addition to agriculture, we need to improve our industries.  One of the goals pursued by this government is the entire separation of the financial and budgetary allocations for each region, thereby giving more financial independency and decision-making power to the individual regions and distribute wealth more equally.   In our meeting today in Birjand, we are set to discuss the allocations to the province for the remainder of the year.  The financial institutions have been reorganized in a way that gives priority to the more deprived.  This is a completely new plan that aims at creating more equality and justice.  In the past, financial institutions have only borrowed to those who could pay it back on time.  A few people were able to get the biggest share of what was available.  For example, three percent of the people were able to take a hold of sixty percent of all allocations.  The government decided to break this, and instead to share it in a more equitable way so that everyone can have access to low-interest loans and the younger people would have a chance to open their own businesses and have their own investments.


Your area has a great industrial capacity, so by creating more factories and improving the industries, your young graduates can take advantage of opportunities by coming back to their own cities and working hard to make it more prosperous.  The government is at your service.  We need to work together to bring more prosperity to our beloved country.  Once again, I thank all of you for your fervent participation today.  I read some of your placards and received your messages.  I promise to review all of them.


I believe that there are some among you who worry about the conditions in their villages or towns, and think that it is not receiving the care that it needs.  So they seek to get a bigger share by gaining more political prestige, thinking that if the latter is achieved, the former will follow.  We will do our best to provide you with economic wellbeing even before the prestige comes, that way the people of each region get what is theirs.  Above all, I wish you success in all things.