In the name of God, the most Merciful and most Gracious,


I thank God the Almighty for the opportunity I have been given tonight to appear in front of you good, Revolutionary, and sincere people of Qom.  We find ourselves in the company of the great and wise [religious figures], but most of all, in front of Vali-Asr [12th Imam due to come back], and I want to take this opportunity to refresh our memories with some lessons from the Revolution.  In a gathering of the most loyal advocates of the Revolution, what better topic is there to talk about than the Revolution itself?  My dear friends, the Islamic Revolution was the greatest event in the history of our nation.  Since Islam was first introduced to the Iranian nation, there has not been a single event of equal importance [than the Islamic Revolution].  The Islamic Revolution has influenced our very being, our destiny, our reason d’etre, our future, and humanity as a whole.  It was not just a simple uprising or a revolt, neither was it an emotionally-driven ephemeral movement by one group to overthrow another and take power, to topple one dynasty and install another, or to provide for the well-being of one layer in society, or one group of people.  My dear friends, the Islamic Revolution is the continuation of what our Imams started; the two [movements] are the same in essence.  It finds its roots in their history.  It started with an uprising, then banners came together and it turned into a huge popular movement with a stated goal.  The Islamic Revolution is not apart from this [greater] movement; it is paving the way for it, and standing at the peak of it.  The substance of our Revolution is the substance of that movement.  Those beautiful slogans that you shouted when the Revolution broke out and are still shouting today—there are some who believe that a group of politicians or poets sat together in a room and fabricated those slogans, but we won’t be fooled—those slogans make up the interpretation of that worldly doctrine.  One of the first slogans that we shouted was that our movement is “Husayni” [referring to Imam Husayn, one of the most revered Imams among Shi’ah Muslims].  This movement is of the same nature, and it is that very substance that has given it its perennial character.  Our Imams pursued a short run goal as well as a long run one.  Our Revolution has a short run and a long run goal as well.  What all the prophets throughout history have struggled for was aimed at that introduction; they all came to pave the way for a global movement.  They all came together to lay bricks for a platform.  What is that platform?  It is the starting point for the bright and ultimate goal of a world ruled by Islam.  They all came for that sole purpose.  My dear friends, the Islamic Revolution has a sole purpose too; it came to pass in order to lay the foundation for an advance and cultivated Islamic society which will ultimately spark that global movement.  Our Revolution, therefore, seeks to establish the same precedent.  If we take away this historical connection, and pervert its goals and purposes, there will be nothing left from it.  In fact, the rule of the Velayat-e Faqih [Supreme Leadership] is just an exercise for life under a world Islamic power.  The Supreme Leader is our connection to that form of governance.  Our Revolution seeks nothing less than the establishment of a prototype for an advance Islamic society that will be exemplified by the rest of the world.  It was with the help of the Almighty and the determination of our Imam [Khomeini] that it took roots right here in Qom and emerged victorious despite heavy opposition from various enemies.  That was the first step; the second is the establishment of an Islamic regime.  It is with the Almighty’s help that that goal has been achieved in this country, although up to this very day, more than 220,000 of our best people have been torn to peaces for its insurability.  In order to sustain and consolidate this, our nation sacrificed what it held most dear; its young, faithful, and pure men and women.  When the Islamic regime was finally established, the third step was to create an Islamic government, and the forth was [the creation of] an Islamic country.  Thereby, the government would guarantee the preservation of Islamic teachings, doctrines, and virtues in all aspects of our society, so our schools, homes, bazaars, and our streets all carry with them the scent of Islam.  This becomes an Islamic country prepared for the final takeoff.  I want to say a few words about the Islamic government.  If we want to have healthy and fair elections, we need to do two things: the first is to examine the last 10 to 15 years and see what happened during this period.  What was achieved?  What were the strong points and the weak points?  We have to have an unbiased and just evaluation, free of individuals per se.  What methods were used?  Economic growth was finally achieved in this country, and political growth.  Where did the defects, weaknesses, and strengths lie?  This must become a blueprint for succeeding groups; if we don’t recognize our strengths and weaknesses now, we will not be able to address them in a constructive way.  The second indispensable point is to recognize the characteristics of an Islamic state.  You might ask “has our government been an anti-Islamic one so far?”  And the answer is “no,” it has neither been anti-Islamic nor pseudo-Islamic.  But what we mean by an Islamic state is a state where the first and most important priority is the implementation of Islamic doctrines, one that is governed by the laws and principles of Islam.  This is different from a government that governs according to its own agenda and preferences.  I want to cite for you some of the characteristics of an Islamic state.  
My fellow friends, an Islamic state has within it the following properties: first, it believes in the completeness of Islam.  In other words, an Islamic state believes that Islam is a universal religion that provides an answer for all the immediate needs of humanity.  It can provide an intelligent answer, an updated answer.  Islam can guarantee the well-being of human beings.  An Islamic state believes that salvation comes only through obedience of the laws and teachings of Islam.  It makes the teachings of Islam widespread throughout the world.  Let me give you some examples: Our enemies try to depict a violent and dry image of us, saying that we are incompetent and fertile.  We must break this trend, and introduce ourselves to the world.  What do we mean by implementing Islam?  Example: Our financial institutions must strive to comply by Islamic rules.  Why?  The answer is plain and simple: The teachings of Islam seek the prosperity of human beings.  Islam says that interest rates of 24 percent, 28 percent, or 30 percent, although at times justifiable by the law, cannot create a healthy society; its repercussions will linger on for some time.  Let me ask you this: Among our nomadic tribes in remoter areas, which can say that they have benefited from 24 percent interest rates?  Who are the people who can benefit from taking out extravagant loans?  Does the average Iranian benefit from that?  No.  It is the prerogative of only a few, and this means that only a few are left to take advantage of opportunities.  And do those few people who are given these enormous sums of money use it to up production, create employment, and contribute to economic growth?  How is something like this achievable?  What kind of production could have a return of 40 to 50 percent, 30 percent of which must be paid back to the bank, another portion of it goes to pay taxes, and finally there is some left to feed the family?  It is not feasible.  Then it is only natural to expect that such amounts will ultimately end up in stock markets and other unhealthy businesses.   Now let’s return to [the principles of] Islam, and ask them to lower them [interest rates].  But as soon as we make such a proposal, they are quick to respond that the people who own savings in their banks will be hurt by it.  This is not the right thing to say.  Now you religious leaders can figure out the religiosity of it, but I look at their consequences.  According to government statistics 3 percent of the people own more than 80 percent of financial assets in the country.  And lately private banks have opened too.  How can a bank turn 15 billion Tomans into 200 billion Tomans in only four years other than by charging high interest rates that fleece the working man?  When opportunities open up to only a few who benefit from it by investing in stocks and bonds, then evidently social divisions and social classes emerge.  By returning to Islam these problems can be solved.  The Islamic state seeks to execute Islamic laws.  It does not seek to imitate models made by others.  The economic/political capitalist model cannot bring prosperity to our nation.  It cannot take us to completion.  
The second characteristic of an Islamic state is seeking justice.  Bringing justice to all is the guiding line of the Islamic state.  Some feel that justice is just a name, or a slogan that you can attach to something and call it just.  When we tell them that their programs and ambitions only create peaks of wealth and troughs of poverty, and where the justice in all this is, they respond by saying “let us build a country first and then we’ll make it a just country”.  But how is that possible?  Justice is the spirit that should govern all government actions.  If you have created an unbalanced system, then you won’t be able to undo it.  How can you reverse directions after the peaks have been built and you find yourself paralyzed between them?  It [the oligarchy] takes control of the media, the factions, the speakers; it even exerts its influence in politics and stands against you.  We have all witnessed in the past years that every time they tried to bring to justice those who pocketed millions for themselves, the government was the one standing on their side.  Elements within the government have defended them.  When you let those peaks take shape, how can you then rid yourself of them so easily?  My dear friends, without justice, we will not have any liberty.  Without justice we cannot have our independence.  Nor can we guarantee our wellbeing.  Without justice there will be no possibility for stable and continuing progress.  Let me give you an example of injustice.  We must get to the root of injustice, and this can be tracked down to some of our officials or to the planning or their programs.  Let me elucidate: the city of Tehran has a population of 7.5 million.  The country as a whole has a population of about 70 million.  So Tehran holds about 11 percent of our population.  Now pay attention to these numbers and you’ll see how our decision-making should be determined by our quest for justice.  Pay attention please, this is a report by the Central Bank: more than 60 percent of economic activity throughout the country takes place in Tehran.  This means that only 40 percent of economic activity lies in the hands of 89 percent of our people.  In other words, the more we move in that direction, the wider the gap becomes.  So it shouldn’t surprise us that our country sides and remoter areas have not had a considerable growth.  Now the second question: Does the 60 percent of economic activity affect everyone in Tehran?  No, I’ve mentioned this before.  Does this economic activity lead to production and job creation for all the inhabitants of Tehran?  Again, the answer is no.  They say we had 8.5 percent growth last year, which isn’t far-fetched.  But this doesn’t mean that all of this was translated into production and put bread on the table of the everyday Iranian.  Let me show you where the problem lies by giving you another example: Let’s say someone comes to Tehran to buy land and gets the permission to build a house.  He spends at least 500 thousand Tomans for each square meter.  But he sells it almost immediately for 2 million per square meter.  Does the 1.5 million in profit translate into production or job creation?  No.  Although it does show up in GDP growth, it does not affect the quality of life.  There are plenty of other examples, but what I’m trying to say is that there is a more equitable way to do this.  The root cause of the problem lies in the excessive concentration of both our software and hardware resources in Tehran.  More than 1500 companies and governmental organizations that have no business in Tehran are located there anyway.  Their business should be in other regions and cities.  But instead they are catching flies in Tehran, thereby imposing a financial burden on the rest of the people.  First of all, they have purchased the most expensive buildings and infrastructure in Tehran, worth millions.  So here’s one cost; why would they buy such an asset and make it inaccessible to everyone else.  And then they start opening offices here and there, but that’s still not the end of it; from Tehran, they want to govern Bushehr (another city), so they constantly commute back and forth, which is costly.  With all these high expectations, of course productivity is going down.  Low productivity is just part of the problem.  By staying in Tehran, these people attract other technicians, specialists, and advisors from the rest of the country into Tehran where they will need housing and accommodations.  Go to the country sides, sell your building here worth 50 million, buy one over there for 5, and spend the rest of it on the youth.  Our problem is not lack of money, but the inequitable distribution of it.  If they don’t want to go, then send other ones.  If the people in those regions are deprived and poor, then go and live among them and help them.  If they aren’t poor and deprived, then just go there and enjoy their company.  Unfortunately, we have been facing a new phenomenon in this country, called the “flying CEOs”.  In every airplane, there are at least a dozen of them.  As if the people living in other regions of this country were from another country.  They are Iranians just as we are, so go and create opportunities for them, and if you can’t we’ll find someone else.  70 million people certainly don’t need to depend on a few to provide for them.  The concentration of software means the centralization of decision-making.  True, some decision-making should be centralized, such as political, economic, and legislative decisions involving the country as a whole.  But who said that every itty-bitty decision should be made in Tehran.  4 individuals sitting in an office from a ministry in Tehran want to plan the 4 billion Toman budget of another state. How can this money be spent?  And that’s when oversight-related difficulties emerge.  Both Tehran and the rest of the country have been entangled by this.  And this is just one example of injustice.  A lot of the executive power could be handed over to the states and governed locally.  Martyr Rajaii, the icon of Godly virtues, whose life was filled with accomplishments, did that exact same thing; he distributed power locally.  He even created local banks, arguing that the communities and their leaders know better what their needs are and how to improve them.  He allocated daily oil revenue among the states.  And he also took the federal government into the states, telling them to live inside the communities to better understand their needs.  I’m sorry to say that last year a report showed that even our governors are now flying around, as if their states were not part of the Islamic Republic to begin with.  Well, return to your regions, and see how justice can contribute to progress and economic growth.  
Another characteristic of the Islamic state is religious popularity.  This is a very important notion; some thought that when our Supreme Leader Ali Khomeini mentioned religious popularity he was trying to say, as others have, that everything the Europeans and Americans have we have it also.  But that’s not what he meant.  Religious popularity is one of the standing pillars of the Islamic state.  Such a state has two elements: the people, and the Imam [religious leader].  Both carry the burden of the entire nation.  Without the presence, interference, cooperation, and oversight of the people, there is no Islamic state.  If you think that by imposing a [Islamic] leader, the problem of Islam will be solved, you are mistaken.  Every single individual should have the responsibility of following Islamic doctrines, of promoting growth and defending the country.  The Islamic state gives each one of you that opportunity.  Its programs are so as to give everyone the understanding that he/she is part of it and that it is their right to engage in it.  If there is corruption, the government is responsible, the judiciary must cut off their hands (metaphorically), but for this to happen popular oversight is a precondition.  When Islam says that everyone should be held responsible, that everyone should engage in “righting the wrong”, it did not exaggerate.  These are commandments.  But when the government itself steps away from such teachings, people’s incentive to participate and be active is mitigated as well.  It is the people who build the country and its economy, not a group of bankers and financiers.  Justice, for that matter, is also brought about by the people; the government only provides the means for achieving this goal.  From the perspective of religious popularity, the people are the true rulers of the country.  The leaders of this country, as our Supreme Leader has said, are the servants of the nation.  When we walk away from Islam the nature of our relation to the people changes.  Officials end up pocketing millions in salaries, millions in benefits, for having done nothing, and when they meet the people they act as if they [the people] were indebted to them.  Religious popularity means the people must be constructive in designing the future of the country.  Our programs must draw them one by one into being active participants.  Let me give you an example of what happens when such motivations fade away as opposed to when they are invigorated.  Why did the Revolution succeed?  Because we all saw ourselves and each other as responsible citizens instead of asking for guidance from our neighbors.  The Revolution was “our” revolution, and that’s how it succeeded, the same way we won the Iran-Iraq war; through individual responsibility.  Can anyone claim that we won the war solely by relying on our military strength?  It was the people and their active participation in the war effort that caused us to win.  
Let me enumerate a few other characteristics of the Islamic state and leave the rest for another time.  The Islamic state preserves the sanctity of the treasury; it considers the treasury to be one of the most precious pearls entrusted to them by the people.  It doesn’t tamper with it.  I recently read an article about an official arrested for using 300 million of public money to decorate his house.  Whose money is this?  Some believe they can hide their weaknesses behind ornaments.  They believe ornaments bring you prestige.  When our leaders behave this way, naive people will follow suit.  We cannot hide ourselves from them.  I am always intrigued by people who come and see me and ask for five minutes of their time, insisting that we go to my office to talk.  I would always ask in disbelief if perhaps they thought that my authority was behind my desk instead of with me.  I told them that I usually carry it with me, and that if they have a problem they should address it right here.  I am disgusted to see that the people who adorn themselves in gold and silver do it “to preserve the image of the state.”  The image of the state will be preserved when there is equality and justice for all, when all the people live in comfort and harmony, when there’s growth for all.  A few days ago I was attacked from all sides after I asked why some [leaders] live in palaces.  Didn’t our Imam [Khomeini] have prestige?  The fact is that the miser and poverty of Muslims started when our leaders moved to palaces.  And they do this for the sake of image and prestige.  What part of our religion says that?  Or is this perhaps the people’s will?  Keep the sanctity of our treasury, and there won’t be any shortages of either money or means.  You saw what happens when our leadership walks away from Islam.  I had a meeting with some officials a while ago.  At the end of the meeting some of us stayed for a little chit-chat.  One of them had almost the entire wealth of the country in his hands.  I asked him how things are, and he said “not so well”.  I asked why, and he said that’s just the way things are, and that nothing can be done unless people take it easy.  I asked why it is the people who have to take it easy.  Have they asked for too much?  Have they trampled on someone else’s rights?  All they are saying is they want to be independent, governed by the laws of Islam, to impose their will on no one and have no one impose their will on them.  What exactly should the people take easy?  Their freedom?  Their Independence?  He responded by saying that people have given up, and that they are tired and have lost patience.  I turned to him and said: “You are the one who has lost his strength and his will.  You’ve built your own ship and you don’t swim with the people anymore.  You’re the one who’s lost it, not the people.  The people are not tired of Islam or their government; they are tired of you.  And you represent neither Islam nor the government.  Unfortunately, some subscribe their weaknesses and incompetence to the people and the government.  Thanks to God Almighty, our nation is stronger than ever, our government is stronger than ever, and our religion is dearer than ever to us.  If there are problems, they are caused by those who have been cut off from the people and Islam.  Let’s return to those values and we’ll see what a paradise we can make of this country.  My last word is:  My dear friends, I strongly and adamantly believe despite all the difficulties and predicaments facing our nation, that the Islamic Revolution and our people will put all of it behind them and create a sophisticated and modern Islamic society in this holy land of ours.