I salute you all and I thank God Almighty for giving me the honor of participating in this wonderful gathering.  How good it is to see the glowing faces of the brave children of the Revolution—conscious, faithful, enduring, and selfless children who cleverly and acutely comprehend contemporary issues and play an active and effective role in shaping them.  I thank God for blessing me with your presence.  Your topic for today is “The World without Zionism.”  What is Zionism anyway?  I guess most of you have been here since this morning, debating among yourselves and doing your own personal research.  I want to emphasize something that most of you already know, but it does not heart to say it again.  What is the Palestinian story, really?  Is it a clash between a group of Jews and Gentiles on one side and Muslims on the other?  Is it a clash between Jews and all other religions?  Is it a conflict between one country and others?  Is it a war between one country and the Arab world?  Is this conflict fought over the small territory of Palestine?  I believe the answer to all these questions is negative.  The founding of the Occupying Zionist Regime was a maneuver by the imperialist world directed against the Islamic world.  There is currently an historical battle between the Islamic world and the Imperialist world, the roots of which go back to centuries ago.  In this historical battle, the tide has changed camps on many occasions.  For a while, Muslims had the upper hand and moved forward, forcing the imperialists to withdraw.  Until turmoil came to our camps and in the past three hundred years, it is us that have been forced to withdraw against the aggressors.  I don’t want to get to the causes of this; instead I’m going to cling to the current course.  A hundred years ago, the last defenses of the Muslim armies crumbled and the Imperialists planted the banner of the Occupying Zionist regime at the heart of Islam.  By advancing into our territories, taking over a part of our lands and setting camps in it, and by bringing their troops and fortifications along, they consolidated their positions in order to conquer more territories from there.  This is what this occupying country is here to do on behalf of the Imperialist world.  They have built a fortification at the heart of Islam so they can expand their reign over the Islamic world from there.  In effect, the current conflict in Palestine is the battle front of the Islamic world against the Imperialists.  Therefore, the outcome of this centuries-long war will be determined by the decisive battle in Palestine.  Today, the Palestinian people are fighting the Imperialist world on behalf of the entire Muslim community.  We are fortunate to say that since the day the Palestinians started to fight for Islam and directed their goals, and attitudes towards Islam, we have been witnessing their progress and advance.  Let me tell you two things.  The first one relates to the subject of this sitting.  This is a very precious subject.  Many [of our own] have been spreading the seeds of hopelessness and despair in this heavy battle between the Islamic world and the infidels.  They constantly try to dash our hopes by telling us that it is impossible to win [against the West].  How is it possible to defeat the United States?  How is it possible to rid the world of Zionism?  But we all know that our objectives are surely attainable.  Let’s take one step backwards.  Before the Islamic Revolution, our country was ruled by a violent regime that was armed to the teeth.  The agents of the SAVAK (former Iranian Intelligence Agency) watched every single thing that happened.  A strange sense of fear had taken over the entire country.  When the Imam [Khomeini] came and said this government must go and it must be replaced by one that does not depend on foreign powers, many of the so-called intellectuals or revolutionaries became proponents of that corrupt regime.  Even after Black Friday (a day on which hundreds of demonstrators were shot at and killed), they all came out in support of the shah’s regime; so did the Western, Eastern, and regional powers.  They said it was impossible, but our people stood strong and the result is that we have been standing on our own feet for 27 years, independently from the United States—so it was possible after all.  The Imam [Khomeini] said that the shackles of the East and the West have to be broken, and they did not believe him.  Weak people who only see what’s around them and constrain themselves to personal preferences and material needs cannot see very far, nor do they believe in anything.  No one thought that we would one day see the collapse of imperialism.  They said the regime had an iron fist, but in my lifetime we broke that iron fist so effectively that if you want to find traces of it now you have to take a trip to the library.  There, if you ask the librarian about it, she would say: “Yes, we have a handful of books eating dust on the corner.  Are you looking for those?”  There’s no trace left of it.  The Imam [Khomeini] said Saddam must go.  He said his fate will be exceptionally dreary.  And what do we see today?  The same man who not long ago spoke with such pride and ego is now chained to a cell in his own country, brought to justice by the very [American] regime that supported his massacres and on whom he had counted for endorsement.  The Imam [Khomeini] has also said that the current Occupying Zionist Regime must be wiped off the map.  There’s wisdom to this sentence.  The Palestinian problem is not one that can be solved by finding a compromise.  What army has ever won a victory by allowing the enemy to dwell at the heart of its territory?  This can only imply defeat.  Anyone who would recognize the existence of this regime, by doing so, would in effect sign the admission of defeat by the forces of Islam.  In his continuing battle against the imperialists and infidels, our dear Imam has always seen the [Israeli] regime as the center of command of the enemy.  I have no doubt that the new waive [of resistance] that has started in Palestine and brought awakening and awareness to the Islamic world, will soon enough wash this glum stain off—this is surely doable.   However, we have to be aware of ruses.  For the past fifty years or so, the leaders of the Imperial world have strived to give legitimacy to this regime.  They have used various subterfuges and put heavy pressure on Islamic countries to make them recognize this regime.  They told us to first recognize it, and once we would do that, other steps would follow.  About 28 or 29 years ago, they took a huge step in that direction.  Unfortunately, one of the countries in the battle front made the mistake [of recognizing Israel], and I hope that it will reverse its decision some day.  Recently, we’ve been witnessing another ruse.  Unable to crush the Palestinian resistance, the [Israeli] regime was forced to evacuate from a small part of Palestine.  Now they want to depict this as the final round and use it as a pretext for the other countries to recognize its legitimacy over the rest of Palestine.  Just because they evacuated the Gaza Strip, now they want that to be the new Palestinian state.  They speak of coexistence between the new Palestinian state and the repressing regime, and that’s the end of the resistance.  Today, they are using their evil designs to turn the regional conflict between the Islamic world and the Occupying Regime and its supporters into a local conflict that concerns only the Palestinians.  By doing so they can appoint a government of their preference in the new Palestinian state and divert the Palestinian cause by creating divisions among Palestinian factions over who is going to rule.  Meanwhile, with a new Palestinian state in place and with the “generous” evacuation of the Gaza Strip, they will then seek the recognition of Islamic countries.  I am very hopeful and pray that Palestinian factions are aware of this enemy tactic.  Victory today highly depends on the Palestinians’ ability to stay united on all fronts.  The fate of Palestine has not been decided yet.  It will be decided once there is one single state of Palestine in the wholly land with a government that belongs to the Palestinian people at it head.  The refugees must return, free elections must take place in which the Palestinian people, regardless of their religion and affiliation, can elect their government.  No need to mention that those who came from far away countries to acquire by force Palestinian lands will have no right to determine its destiny.  I hope that the Palestinian people will keep persevering, just as they have for the past ten years or so, against the occupation.  This is just a short phase.  If we get past it, the rest of the way will be straight and downhill; the Occupying Regime will disappear and a true Palestinian state will be established.  I want to warn all the leaders of the Islamic world not to fall into the enemy’s trap.  If anyone, out of naivety and perverseness, or Lord forbid, out of selfishness and lust for the world, under the pressure of the Occupying Regime, decides to take a step towards its recognition, let him know that he will forever be a source of shame and disdain to the Islamic world.  The problem of Palestine is the problem of the whole Islamic world.  Politicians cannot allow themselves to decide the fate of Palestine in closed rooms; Muslims’ safety and security can never be guaranteed as long as their historical enemy dwells within them.  Look at the world stage today!  Look at who we have to deal with.  To maintain the impetus within us to resist the enemy, we have to delve into the enemy’s plan [to destroy us].  Who are we dealing with?  People who do not feel the least bound by any religious or ethical principle.  They let you know beforehand when they want to assassinate someone.  They say [for example] that today is Fathi Shaqaqi’s turn; that beloved martyr who’s blood was prematurely shed.  They inform him beforehand, then they come, burn his farm, kill his children in front of their mother, demolish his home, pile up their nuclear arsenal, and then pretend to be the defender of human rights.  A minister from one of the Western countries with which we are in negotiations right now had a meeting with me a few days ago.  I brought up the subject and asked him how it is that a repressive regime not far away from here openly defies everyone by imprisoning young Palestinians who were apprehended in their homes, by amassing a stockpile of nuclear armaments, and so on, and you turn a blind eye on it and keep supporting that regime.  Meanwhile you don’t hesitate to come and see me to talk about human rights?  When the Revolution broke out—though most of you probably don’t remember this, or were not born yet—in these very streets of Tehran, terrorist groups had gone on a killing spree, murdering hundreds of people.  Let me tell you a few stories that should give you an idea of what kind of enemy we are dealing with and why it is imperative for us to stand strong.  Shortly after the outbreak of the revolution, I was a student at the Science and Technology University.  Back then there were different student groups.  Just like you now, I was a member of the Islamic Student Association.  A second group was forged with ties to the Mojahedin Khalq (an exiled Iranian terrorist organization with current headquarters in Iraq).   There was a quarrel among us once.  To avoid a confrontation, we decided to pick an unbiased intermediary to judge the matter.  We chose our own delegate, and they chose their.  Then, as planned, a third person was chosen upon whom both groups agreed—a certain Martyr Ghasem Kelishadi.  We presented our case to him, and so did they.  After reflecting upon it, he finally made up his mind and ruled in our favor.  He said that according to university regulations, we were undisputedly right.  Although for us it wasn’t a big deal to begin with, later we found out that the other student group went to Ghasem’s house—a young and timid fellow who had lost his father and had to work his way through school—and gunned and martyred him in front of his mother for the role he played as a middleman and for his decision to cast his vote for the Islamic Student Association.  In Narmak (a district of Tehran), where my father owned his own business, next to my father’s store there was a small groceries store.  The owner had decided to hang the picture of Imam [Khomeini] in his store.  The Mojahedin Khalq came into his store one day and gunned him in front of his wife and three kids.  One of his kids ended up in a mental hospital and his wife never truly recovered from the incident.  I told him [the Western minister] that these people [the killers] are today walking freely in your countries and you even pay for their expenses, and now you’ve come here to talk to me about human rights?  All of this goes back to the battle that I mentioned earlier in my speech.  We have to recognize this battlefield distinctly.  Where do we stand?  When we hear something, we have to know where it came from and what intention lies behind it.  We have to look at it in terms of the battle between Islam and the West, and compile it in our minds in order to shed light on it.  Once again, I would like to express my gratitude to all of you; the Islamic Student Association, first founded by the Imam himself, and whose branches extend all over the country now, must be well safeguarded.  If our country is independent today, if we have services, if we have progress, it is mostly due to the work done by the youth here in the Islamic Student Association, in an atmosphere and culture of religious devotion, chastity, gratitude, progress, and sacrifice.  This is a very precious entity.  If we were to review the contribution made by individual groups and parties to the overall progress of our country, it would be almost zero [percent].  But the youth who participated in this organization are in effect the precious pearls of our country’s future.  I thank all of you for your activities in such organization and for your intellectual awareness.  I would also like to thank all those who helped organize this great event.  Without any doubt in my mind, I know that soon enough you will all be able to experience a world without Zionism and without the US [foreign influence], and that you will breath air in a just world ruled by Islam.