Speech by the Taoiseach, Enda Kenny TD, at the Official Opening of the Kerry Global Technology and Innovation Centre at the Millennium Business Park, Naas
01.10.2015
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
I’m delighted to be here on this momentous day for the official opening of the Kerry Global Technology and Innovation Centre here in Naas.
Having participated in the breaking of the first sod for the project in July 2013, it is fantastic to see firsthand the cathedral of discovery that has risen from the ground.
Millennium Park is now firmly on the map as a key location of enterprise and innovation in Ireland.
Kerry Global Technology and Innovation Centre
I’m happy that I and the other representatives of the Government can share in this fantastic day both for the Kerry Group and for the Irish food sector. This investment represents a resounding endorsement of the Irish food sector and its capacity to meet the strategic needs of major global players.
It is a clear vote of confidence in the quality and expertise of Irish food science graduates, and in their capacity to deliver cutting edge solutions in pursuit of new and innovative products.
I’d like to praise the Kerry Group management team for their inspiring vision, determination and efforts in bringing this project to fruition.
I also wish to acknowledge the work of Enterprise Ireland in supporting this ambitious development.
This is a landmark project for Ireland – this new global technology and food innovation centre will not only support over 900 jobs, but its impact on the Irish food industry, the food research community and also the wider knock-on impact to the Irish economy will be significant.
Having a centre of food innovation on this scale will be a beacon to the global food industry that Ireland is where you need to be if you want the best in food innovation. 
Now fully operational, I understand the Centre currently has over 800 staff on site and this number is growing on a weekly basis. At its peak it is expected to employ over 960 staff by 2019.
Approximately half of these jobs will be involved directly in food research.
The calibre of the majority of the jobs on the campus will be extremely high, including graduate, post graduate and doctorate level positions.
Agri-food Sector
This is strategically highly significant for Ireland’s food industry, which is Ireland’s largest indigenous manufacturing sector.
Since this Government came into office in 2011 we have prioritised the agri-food sector as a way to secure the recovery.
It has acted as a ray of hope during the darkest days of recession. It remains the lifeblood of rural Ireland.
The sector supports close to 170,000 jobs and 12% of Ireland’s exports.
It still has a big role to play in securing the emerging recovery.
The ambitions for the sector, which are set out in the roadmap for the industry, “Food Wise 2025”, are demanding.
By 2025, we want to see exports grow to €19 billion while supporting an additional 23,000 jobs.
The agri-food sector continues to grow, evolve and adapt, and this is epitomised in today’s events here in Naas, centred on innovation, research and smart growth.
I am extremely confident that these are the building blocks not only for a sustainable future for Kerry and its employees, but for its suppliers, its broader catchment area here in Naas and beyond.
Securing the Recovery
What is also important for the agri-food industry, and international companies like Kerry, is stability and a pro-enterprise environment from which everyone can plan for the future with confidence.
In the past, people might have seen the approach of a Budget and a General Election and thought ‘Here we go again’.
My commitment to you here is that this Government that I lead will work to secure the recovery and to ensure that its benefits reach every part of Ireland.
Earlier this week we published our capital investment programme for badly needed roads, public transport, schools and healthcare facilities.
The plan has been acknowledged as an affordable and realistic approach to the challenges we face. It will help us reach our goal of restoring all the jobs lost in the recession by 2018 and to get unemployment down to 6% by 2020, while still planning to eliminate Government borrowing by 2018.
We will never go back to the bad old days of Boom and Bust.
This will be our approach for the upcoming Budget.
To avoid the mistakes of the past, our plan caps public spending growth at below the underlying growth rate of the economy.
As a result, the overall level of budget flexibility will remain between €1.2 billion to €1.5 billion with measures evenly split between tax reform and public expenditure.
If this rule had been applied during the period between 2000 to 2007, the worst of the recession could have been avoided.
As part of the Budget we’ll continue our policy of making work pay and rewarding work.
Personal income taxes on low and middle income workers are still too high. This is bad for job creation, bad for recovery, and acts as a disincentive to our returning immigrants.
I have said that we will cut the 7% USC rate to bring the overall tax rate below 50% for this group.
And we will end the unfair tax treatment for the self-employed and small businesses, starting in this budget with those self-employed people on lower incomes.
We will also take the first steps of our plan to improve childcare quality and affordability, making it easier for parents to work to provide for their families.
Conclusion
By providing this stable and pro-job environment we can reassure the Kerry Group and all its employees of better days ahead for Ireland.
But for today I would like to conclude by congratulating Kerry Group and all involved in what is the largest investment in food innovation ever by a company in Ireland, and I wish you every success here in Naas.
Kerry Group are a company with local roots but a global reach, a company we can all be justifiably proud of, and who can be justifiably proud of themselves.
I look forward to watching your progress in the coming years.
