EXCERPT FROM THE MANIFESTO OF BERTIE AHERN’S PARTY FIANNE FAIL FOR 2002-2007
FOREWORD BY AN TAOISEACH
Since 1997, Fianna Fáil has led a Government which has helped our country to achieve a lot. Real progress has been achieved on problems which we have struggled with for generations.
The era of mass unemployment and emigration has been brought to an end and we finally have in place the foundations for building a just and lasting peace on this island.
On the basis of the ambitious programme which we set before the people in 1997, we have worked hard to implement our promises and we are proud of what we have achieved - but we also know that there is a lot more that remains to be done.
This manifesto sets out an agenda for the years ahead to protect and build upon our recent peace, prosperity and progress. Over the next few weeks we will publish further documents relating to key issues.
We are now taking our message to the people. That message is that our country has achieved a lot and can, with the right policies, achieve much more in the years ahead.
OVERALL SUMMARY
Over the last five years, Fianna Fáil in Government has worked hard to deliver on its promises to the Irish people.
The era of mass unemployment and emigration has come to an end and there has been an historic breakthrough for peace.
We are proud of our achievements, but no Government could be expected to achieve everything it aspires to do in one term. We believe that the last five years have provided the essential foundation for building a lasting peace, prosperity and progress
but we also believe that there is much more still to be done.
In this election the people are faced with a clear choice, between ambitious yet responsible policies or a return to the failed approaches of the past. This Manifesto sets out our detailed agenda for the years ahead – with clear priorities on how we can:
Build lasting peace and reconciliation on this island
Protect and expand prosperity for all
Achieve sustained progress on important issues such as health, pensions and education
Deliver more effective and responsive public services.
PEACE
Amongst the full range of achievements since 1997, it is the historic breakthrough for peace represented by the Good Friday Agreement that we are most proud of. But the work of building a just and lasting peace is not yet over.
Our vision of an Ireland at peace, also involves an Ireland which takes its place amongst the nations of the earth as an active and committed worker for international cooperation and development. This includes our participation in the European Union, United Nations and other international bodies. 
It also includes helping to support the world’s poorest and most vulnerable peoples.
We will use all of our political strength to broaden and deepen peace and reconciliation on this island.
We will seek to promote the cause of peace internationally and will ensure that Ireland becomes one of the world’s top 5 development aid donors.
We will work to ensure that Ireland remains a full and active participant at the heart of the European Union.
PROSPERITY
In 1997 we promised the people a new era of prosperity. In the place of ‘growth without jobs’ and high personal taxation, we have delivered the historic advance of over 370,000 new jobs as well as record tax reductions and one of the Europe’s strongest financial situations. Under Fianna Fáil Ireland has been the world’s most dynamic economy, with prosperity reaching far beyond traditional areas and sectors.
But the work must go on: irresponsible policies could return us to the failed model of the 1980s when Ireland led the world in indebtedness. Prudent economic policies and investment in the long-term security of our prosperity are absolutely vital. Our
programme for the next five years is based on maintaining Ireland as a strong, dynamic economy and ensuring that we build lasting prosperity for all.
We will maintain the Budget close to balance or in surplus in accordance with the Stability and Growth Pact.
We will introduce a radical new way of funding and delivering major capital programmes through the establishment of a National Development Finance Agency which will, in the first instance, concentrate on roads, public transport, health facilities and schools.
We will consolidate the spectacular reduction in taxation since 1997 and complete our programme of corporation tax reduction.
We will invest in research and information technologies as a key to our future prosperity.
We will develop the social, economic and physical infrastructure of rural Ireland.
We will actively support the development of the regions.
We will implement a comprehensive integrated transport policy.
PROGRESS
Fianna Fáil believes that the great challenges of building peace and prosperity, have at their core the objective of achieving real and sustained social progress. We have worked hard to use this period of national opportunity to invest in vital social services and to lift well over 200,000 people out of poverty.
But we know there is a lot more to do. That’s why we are committed to an ambitious agenda to ensure social progress including the ending of consistent poverty in our country, the expansion of employment opportunities and the development of world- class public services.
We will work to end consistent poverty in our country.
We will reach a level of at least €200 per week for all old-age pensions.
We will protect our National Pension Reserve Fund from the irresponsible and short-sighted raiding proposed by others.
We will seek to negotiate a new Partnership Agreement.
We will complete our programme of increasing Child Benefit.
We will reduce class sizes for the junior years in primary schools and implement a programme to achieve at least minimum modern standards for all school buildings.
We will implement our Health Strategy to permanently end waiting lists and achieve a world-class health system for all.
We will end waiting lists for care services for people with disabilities.
We will recruit an extra 2,000 Gardai and target them against street crime and drugs.
We will work to develop disadvantaged rural and urban communities.
We will promote diversity and tolerance.
We will promote the sporting and cultural life of the nation.
LOOKING BACK, MOVING FORWARD
Last year, we in Fianna Fáil celebrated our seventy-fifth anniversary. We remembered the challenges of our young republic and marked our growing self-confidence as a nation. We celebrated an Irish democracy which is governed by the rule of law and a vision of Ireland which is enterprising, progressive and inclusive. We saluted not just a political party but a movement which reflects the aspirations and hopes of all Irish people. As we once again put an ambitious programme before the people we continue to draw on the Party’s record of building peace, prosperity and progress in our country.
Since 1926, Fianna Fáil has been a catalyst for broadening the world of Ireland. During the 1960s, our Programmes for Economic Expansion transformed the economic direction and dynamic of our country.  Our vision of free secondary education and radically expanded 3rd-level provision ensured that the door of opportunity was opened for our country. Our policies promoted a more equitable and accessible system of services and support. In 1965, Fianna Fáil initiated the ground-breaking talks on Northern Ireland and in 1973, we led Ireland into the EEC.
In doing this, we drew on the idealism of our founders and raised the expectations of new generations.
New directions are always challenging and often uncomfortable. But the people have trusted Fianna Fáil to lead them towards a new Ireland. Their support was vindicated in a succession of achievements that transformed the nation. With a weak and ineffective Government leaving Ireland in serious economic difficulties, it was Fianna Fáil which again led Ireland back to recovery, stability and growth. 
We pioneered social partnership, an approach which has well outpaced the aggressive ideological policies found elsewhere. 
We led Ireland through the increasingly complex world of the European Union and again, the Irish people embraced our vision that a new Ireland could develop with confidence only in a broader world.
Over the last five years, Fianna Fáil has again led Ireland through a period of unprecedented prosperity and growth. We ended the era of mass unemployment and created over 370,000 new jobs. We raised pensions to historic levels and dramatically increased investment in vital public services such as health, education and social supports. We provided for the first long-term strategic plan to improve our infrastructure and our quality of life. We consolidated an economy that is still the envy of the world.
And, in our proudest achievement, we achieved an historic breakthrough for peace – restoring the ceasefires and negotiating the Good Friday Agreement
which ended decades of violence and civil strife on our island. We kept our word to the Irish people. We created something that was real and tangible and once again, Fianna Fáil delivered.
It was the dream of Wolfe Tone and Robert Emmet that Ireland should take its place among nations. Fianna Fáil has always been committed to this ideal and worked to ensure that Ireland makes an active and positive contribution to the European Union, the United Nations and other international bodies. We have also always believed that our Nation has responsibilities to poorer countries – and we are proud to be the Party which has ensured that Ireland has, during our term, become one of the top aid donors in the world.
Over the last five years, we have led an Ireland which is exciting and dynamic. But it is also a changed Ireland where our people want to secure what we have achieved, build on it and move forward. We believe that the work is only beginning to make sure that our country builds and protects lasting peace, prosperity and progress.
Our Republican philosophy is derived from a belief in the people and has at its core a social vision where Government works hard to deliver for the people. Our aim in building and sustaining a vigorous and innovative economy is to improve the standard of living and quality of life of all our people, and to make Ireland the flourishing country that generations of patriots dreamed of – and we want that Ireland to be a peaceful and pluralist place.
It is in this spirit that we set out before the people our programme for the next five years and ask them for their support.
