Presenting the government team 2018-2023 - 5 Star Movement
March 2018


Thank you, Luigi. Thank you, to all of you. I would like to specify, as a jurist, that I have accepted the role of candidate for the Minister’s position, obviously aware that some instructional steps will be needed, which will be presided and supervised by the President of the Republic, who, as Luigi Di Maio has specified more than once, has specific prerogatives from the Constitution. 
I have accepted to collaborate with Luigi Di Maio, in the logic of a spirit of service. I have particularly put effort, and will put maximum effort, in trying to obtain some, yes it’s true, very ambitious objectives: making public administration more efficient, simply the relations between the public administration and the citizens, the economic operators and the users in general, to spread amongst citizens also the culture of legality, of respecting Art. 54 of the Constitution. Those to whom public functions are entrusted, have the duty to fulfil them with discipline and honour. 
Also valorising democracy is a very important point.
My first contact with Luigi Di Maio was 4 years ago, it was partly remembered (by him). I was contacted and I was requested availability for being nominated by the Italian Parliament as Component of the Organ of auto government of the administrative justice. Luigi Di Maio will remember, I was very clear; for intellectual honesty I specified: I did not vote for you. I also specified: I can’t even consider myself a sympathizer of yours. I did not know you (looking at Di Maio). 
In these four years, in which I have carried out this high role, I can ensure you that I have received not even one phone call that could in any way contain any information that might interfere with the delicate role that I have taken. (applause)
The promise was maintained: during the course of the initial call, I was immediately told: “Professor, we do not care, we want an independent profile, we know your Curriculum, we want that you put your professional rigour at the service of the administrative justice.”
I could verify from personal experience that the culture of legality is in the DNA of these young friends, the respect for the institutions is in their DNA, and it is in their DNA that care towards a concept that is now out-dated: public ethics. I shall remind this concept that was very dear to, I would like to remind him here, a jurist of high virtue, who passed away, Stefano Rodotà. 


A dialogue was recently started, as the turning point was when I saw how the lists were composed. It is marvellous to see such opening to exponents of the so called civil society, let’s call it like that; to professional figures, to competent figures. It is a marvellous, incredible political lab, which will surely enrich not only this political force, but also the Parliament.


Let’s now turn to some programmatic line, which I will synthesize to you. But first, a premise; a premise is mandatory here: the current legislative framework is farraginous as it has never been. Who operates, the juridical operators, knows it well because it results farraginous and incoherent to these same juridical operators, and hence the experts, so imagine how it is for the citizens. There is an old principle that connects us back to, think about it, Roman Law: the ignorance of the law cannot constitute a cause for justification. Yes, but this implies a framework in which the laws are clear, comprehensible for the citizens, so this principle lost its sense in this current context. So, firstly we need to fight this normative hypertrophy, we need to act so as to eliminate, contrast, this objective, diffused legislative ignorance, that gives advantage to the dishonest, and penalizes the honest ones, the operators that want to respect the rules. Which points?


First of all, it is needed to operate on a complete reorganization of the judicial order. It is needed to drastically abrogate the useless laws. Four hundred of them, Luigi Di Maio has anticipated it, have already been found. Luigi, I believe they will be much more when we will complete the activity of registering them (applause). We need to reorder the current legislation, on the basis of their sector of activity, so that the operators can make use of efficient, comprehensible and clear normative bodies. 


Second of all, we need to simplify to the maximum all of the bureaucratic steps. Think about it, today it is difficult to carry out a rigorous census of the myriads of existing administrative proceedings, and the administrators know this. We therefore need: auto-certification, and obviously controls. Controls need to be efficient, but also concentrated, because the economic operators, the citizens, cannot succumb the controls spread out in time. And then, we need to reorder the independent authorities. You know, today we have authorities responsible for crucial sectors of the economic activity and what have we found with the passing of time? That there are dozens of time, there are overlapping competences, legislative vacuums. Then we need to reinforce the legislation against corruption, but not in the form of penal sanctions, rather foreseeing those initiatives, such as forms of anomalous financing in those nebulous contexts and lead to episodes of corruption.


Lastly, and then I conclude, it is needed to valorise meritocracy. Meritocracy means first of all creating a plan of requalification of public personnel, but it also means creating the premises so that the norms and the roles inside the public administration are rigorously anchored to the specific, real competences, and so that the economic incentives do not spread as it they were rain, but so that they distributed on the basis of real effort and objective results achieved.


Lastly, alongside the Minister for Education, we will for sure have to integrally review the discipline of the personnel, and the reform of the “bad school”.


(Applause, Conte leaves the room)