Speech by Prime Minister Algirdas Butkevičius at the event
“Achievements of the Lithuanian Presidency of the EU Council“
Madam Speaker,
Your Excellencies,
Members of the Seimas,
Distinguished Guests,
I feel privileged to be here in this meaningful event held in the Seimas of the Republic of
Lithuania, and share with you my thoughts and delights. May I first of all point out that the
success of the Lithuanian Presidency of the Council of the European Union largely
depended on the mobilised efforts and early preparations of the Lithuanian authorities.
Progress has been achieved in a number of important and complex issues on the EU
agenda. The feedback from our partners as regards our Presidency has always been
exceptionally good. Today, we can safely say that we have taken another step towards
making Lithuania’s name related to credibility and quality.
Let me give you a few figures:
- 147 of 234 legislative and non-legislative initiatives agreed;
- 47 Council conclusions adopted;
- Successfully completed negotiations on a 960 billion euro EU multi-annual budget;
- Lithuania hosted about 300 meetings, including 22 of high level. All of them were
covered by 1800 journalists, which brought the name of Lithuania into the first headlines
of the world media.
Not only the Lithuanian EU Presidency strengthened its institutional and administrative
capacities, but also provided a possibility to the world of getting acquainted with its
history, culture, business, and academic achievements. The circle of Lithuania’s friends
has become larger, which will have enormous significance in promoting Lithuania’s
interests both now and in the future.
It should be noted that the beginning was not easy – we had to sail into uncharted waters.
However, I would like to share my delight about the political maturity of the Lithuanian
Presidency – thanks to the mobilisation and close cooperation of the major political
parties, as well as timely decisions of the Seimas and the Government, which ensured
effective work before and during the Presidency.
Lithuanian Presidency’s attention to the financial sustainability, competitiveness,
economic growth and employment, energy, the Baltic Sea Strategy, the external borders
and the Eastern Partnership has been very important towards building a credible, growing
and open Europe.

Equipped with these priorities, Lithuania headed as many as 28 Member States,
representing them in the EU institutions.
Perhaps the biggest our challenge was a 7-year budget hotly contested at the European
Parliament.
I am happy that successfully continuing the work undertaken by Poland, Denmark,
Ireland, and Cyprus, we have agreed about the majority of the 70 legal acts relating to the
budget, with allocations for the Cohesion Policy, agriculture, education, research,
innovation, energy and other areas, which will contribute to global competitiveness,
economic growth and job creation.
Another important achievement is key progress in building the banking union. We have
found compromise among Member States on the second element of the banking union – a
single resolution mechanism, made final agreements on bank recovery and resolution,
and the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive. All these decisions add to the credibility of
the EU financial system, particularly in the current economic climate, and they also help
protect taxpayers' money in the process of the rescue of the banking system.
Also, our Presidency has seen to the adoption of specific recommendations for Member
States as regard economic policy coordination, as well as to strengthening of the
Economic and Monetary Union, while focusing on the social strand.
The Lithuanian Presidency has placed sufficient emphasis on youth employment: the
completion of negotiations with the European Parliament on the European Social Fund will
enable the introduction of the Youth Guarantee across the European countries later this
year. Council’s declaration on the apprenticeship alliance and conclusions regarding
better social inclusion of unemployed or not in education young people will help reduce
youth unemployment.
An agreement has been reached on the rights of free movement of workers', on a
supplementary pension (earned in a foreign country) by EU-moving workers, and rights to
social welfare of family members placed in another country.
Lithuania's Presidency has given impetus to the development of the digital market with the
negotiations launched on the directive of electronic identification to help defining the
electronic signature, electronic documents, electronic delivery of services, site identity. A
great emphasis has been placed on countering cybercrime. Interior Ministers have agreed
on the implementation of the EU's cyber security monitoring.
At our initiative the Data Protection Package was discussed also at the ministerial level.
We sought to find a balance between the protection of the rights of EU citizens and
economic stimulus. The importance of this issue has attracted lot of public visibility and an
outbreak of concern about call tapping. Lithuania took urgent actions in July with a view to
starting a dialogue with the U.S. on data protection.
Together with the European Commission, we held in Vilnius the largest European

Research and Innovation Forum ICT 2013, which convened 4.8 thousand participants
from 74 countries around the world.
Lithuania's Presidency also saw to the formal confirmation of the reform in procurement,
where EU public bodies spend 420 billion euros.
Significant progress has been made in energy. For the first time, at ministerial level
statements were approved on strengthening of EU's internal energy market and the
external dimension of EU's energy policy. This is a much-needed guidance to more
competitive energy prices, greater energy security, and elimination of energy islands in
2015.
The high- level energy conference held in Vilnius on 4-5 November introduced a list of
energy infrastructure projects of common interest, which can claim to the Union's financial
support. Among these projects there are 6 Lithuanian electricity and gas infrastructure
projects.
Important decisions have been taken in the field of health - agreement in the European
Parliament on the revision of the Directive on Tobacco, as well as on clinical trials.
On agriculture, Lithuania managed to reach a final agreement on the EU agricultural
reform package and agreement on fisheries fund.
On education, the attention was paid to the quality and effectiveness of the promotion of
innovation by science and business, thus bringing education and employment closer
together. It was for the first time, that the European agenda included issues of open
educational resources on the Internet, and ministers adopted conclusions on effective
leadership in education.
At Lithuania's efforts, the Council reached an agreement on recovering cultural artefacts
unlawfully removed from the territory of an EU member state and adopted Conclusions on
media freedom and pluralism in the digital environment.
Under Lithuania’s leadership, the EU properly prepared for the 19th United Nations
Conference on the Framework Convention on Climate Change in Warsaw.
After complex negotiations, we were able to get going from the standstill the EU emissions
trading scheme, aimed to reduce pollution and encourage investment in more
environmentally friendly technologies.
The fact that all EU ministers stressed the added value of the macro-regional strategies
shows that the Baltic -Nordic cooperation can serve as a role model for other regions. The
success of the Baltic Sea Strategy, whose importance was also underlined by the Seimas,
led to other macro-regional cooperation projects, such as the Danube Strategy and the
foreseen Ionian Strategy.

We have succeeded to move forward in terms of effective management of migration and
the external borders, including the so-called smart borders package. And in response to
the tragic events at Lampedusa, a Joint Task Group was set up to develop a plan of
action to prevent similar tragedies in the future.
On EU's external policy, one of the major events - the Eastern Partnership Summit in
Vilnius having brought together all the EU leaders.
It can be claimed that the Eastern Partnership has gained new momentum and shape.
Significant progress has been achieved on a visa-free regime with the Eastern partners.
Progress on the comprehensive free trade agreements with Moldova and Georgia will
promote closer friendship and open up new opportunities for business and investment.
The EU was ready to sign the Association and Free Trade Agreement with Ukraine. Most
of the provisions of this Agreement would have come into force without waiting for a full
ratification. Today, we are still committed to accelerating the signature of the Association
Agreement with Ukraine, at the same time we have to send a strong positive signal to the
Ukrainian people and the new government of Ukraine: both in terms of the financial
support as well as the liberalization of visas.
The unfolding world events today show that it is more important not to lose the momentum
acquired in relations with our Eastern neighbours. It is necessary to maintain the EU's
commitment to sign the Association Agreements with Moldova and Georgia by this
autumn, seek to implement a visa-free regime with Moldova, and defend Ukraine's
European integration aspirations. We need to continue to show solidarity and consider the
strengthening of the program in terms of the next summit meeting in Riga in 2015.
Significant progress has been made in the negotiations for a trade agreement with the
U.S., we have also seen to finalisation of the EU-Canada free trade negotiations, and a
mandate for negotiations with China on the investment agreement.
We have succeeded to push forward the EU enlargement agenda: renewal of membership
talks with Turkey, approval of a mandate for negotiations with Serbia and opening of five
new chapters for the negotiations with Montenegro.
We have paid great attention to the EU's security and defence policy: the European
leaders for the first time after five-year hiatus considered the issues of defence, and
Lithuania actively contributed to the debate. Events in the Crimea show the importance of
these issues not only for Lithuania, but also for entire Europe.
To achieve a stronger global role of the EU, we have agreed on the EU's external financial
instruments to help in the necessary reforms towards spreading democratic values and a
more effective delivery of EU assistance to partner countries, their regions and civil
organizations.

Distinguished Members of the Seimas,
It is only natural that during the Lithuanian EU Presidency in the Year of EU citizens a
major role was played by the Seimas. From granting mandate to each item on EU's
agenda to such important events as the EU affairs parliamentary committee conference,
branch committee meetings with relevant committees of the Parliament, as well as the
European and Latin American Parliamentary Assembly, the meeting of Chairmen of
Foreign Affairs Committees and Parliamentary Democracy Forum, and the upcoming
meeting of the European Union Parliament Speakers and others. Your contribution was
visible, substantial and appreciated.
I would like to point out that the inter-parliamentary conference on common foreign and
security policy and the common security and defence policy, held in the Seimas, focused
on the parliamentary supervision of these policy issues, as well as on global security
challenges.
The Seimas hosted the final conference of European citizens under the symbolic title
“What is needed for each year to become the year of citizens”
The work of the Lithuanian Presidency was directed towards combined efforts to build a
credible, growing, and open Europe, which will effectively address issues relevant to the
people.
The effectiveness of our first EU Presidency in our history is demonstrated not only by the
significant outcomes, but also saved nearly 40 million by the public authorities in terms of
the presidency budget in 2013.
In appreciation for the constructive and fruitful efforts of all the public institutions, I would
like to share my delight about the strengthened cooperation not only with our EU partners,
but also with non-governmental organizations, and business, and the people in Lithuania
have learnt more about Lithuania's membership in the EU.
The successful Presidency rounds off the first decade of Lithuania's EU membership and
serves as a solid basis for the country's future.
Today, on Lithuania’s behalf, I wish every success for Greece.
My wishes to us all would be not to let go the momentum gained, our mobilisation and find
the consensus with the political parties regarding the strategic development of the state,
which are badly needed to continue addressing the concerns of the people of Lithuania
and strengthening the European element in Lithuania.
Thank you.

