Name of politician: Najib Razak
Title of Speech: Launch of the new Proton Perdana
Date of Speech: 14 June 2016
Category: Ribbon-cutting
Links: https://www.nst.com.my/news/2016/06/151818/full-text-pm-najibs-speech-launch-new-proton-perdana


PM Najib's speech at launch of new Proton Perdana


Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Razak at the launch of the new Proton Perdana.
June 14, 2016 @ 12:57pm


Distinguished guests,


Ladies and gentlemen,


I am pleased to be here today to launch Proton’s latest executive sedan, the new Proton Perdana.


I hope it will be a turning point for Proton. The Malaysian automotive industry is an important and strategic part of our manufacturing sector. The overall automotive industry and related sectors employ around 550,000 people and contribute RM30 billion to our GDP.


Proton alone has 12,000 direct employees, and another 50,000 people are employed by the company’s 350 parts and components manufacturers and support and services-related vendors.


Since its first car – the Proton Saga – was launched in 1985, Proton has produced well over four million cars, and it has become a very well-known national brand.


But, ladies and gentlemen,


Let us be straightforward and frank about this: since the company was established in 1983, the Government has provided grants, various forms of assistance, as well as taxes forgone, to Proton to the tune of nearly RM14 billion in total.


The company's share of the domestic automotive market reached a peak of 74 percent in 1993. Today it is around 15 percent.


Proton is not currently in the position that it should be. It lacks the right research and development ability and the production scale required to remain competitive.


In April, the Government approved a loan of RM1.5 billion to Proton Holdings so that the company could pay for components that had been supplied.


This was not a bailout, as the loan came with strong conditions. But the urgent need for the cash injection laid bare the fact that there are serious structural flaws within Proton.


Some of these go back a long way. The question has been asked if the business model was flawed from the start. Malaysia, some said, was not a large enough market for a national car manufacturer to forge a sustainable future, one in which it could stand on its own two feet.


Proton flourished, yes, but only due to a very high level of Government help. Our car industry grew under the umbrella of protectionism, with quotas on engine sizes and Malaysians paying high import duties on foreign cars.


At times there was a sense of hubris – that Proton could do anything because the Government would always back it. Two factories were built, capable of producing 400,000 units a year. But last year Proton sold only102,000 cars.


There has been too much political interference in Proton’s strategy, management – including of personnel – and business model.


We saw the results of that early this year. A manufacturer which should be a source of national pride was facing a very difficult situation. The Government stepped in again. To protect Malaysian jobs, to protect Malaysian families who rely on Proton, and to protect the company’s business partners’ income and livelihoods.


We stepped in because the well-being of the people is always our first concern. We will never fail to support Malaysian workers and suppliers. We will always fight to ensure that no one is left behind.


Now, I am pleased to say, there have been significant changes at the top levels of Proton. Tun Mahathir’s era of political interference has come to an end.


Now it is time for lessons to be learned, and for serious measures and reforms to be put in place for the company to get back on track, and realise its potential once again.


This starts with the assistance provided by the Government being conditional on Proton meeting stringent standards of professional management going forward; ensuring that the company has a model for long-term sustainability; and immediately identifying a strategic foreign partner.


The loan was not a blank cheque. The company must prove itself, both in the domestic and the international markets. Ultimately, Proton must build up a strong export programme and become less reliant on Malaysian buyers.


The Government is more than willing to work hand in hand with the private sector to promote enterprise, development and the growth of Malaysian businesses. But if the Government supports industries and companies, there have to be results. We cannot put the people’s money into ventures that cannot support themselves.


So we want – we all want – Proton to succeed again. This is why the company will be assisted in meeting the Government’s conditions by the newly-formed Special Task Force.


It consists of representatives from both the private and public sectors, with a variety of experience in finance, business, and marketing, amongst other fields.


And it is headed by Pemandu’s Dato’ Sri Idris Jala – who, as you all know, is a man who knows a thing or two about turning businesses around!


At the same time, the role of the Task Force is limited. It is only to identify the strategic foreign partner, and monitor as well oversee the turnaround process. We have learned from Proton’s past – so the Task Force will not interfere in the day-to-day operations of the company.


Ladies and gentlemen,


The launch of the new Proton Perdana today should be the start of a new chapter in the company’s history. Proton must deliver cars that meet the requirements of customers.


I am told that in anticipation of its launch, 900 units of the Perdana were pre-booked – which shows the confidence that people have in this new model, and their desire for Proton to succeed.


Proton’s management tell me that they are confident that customers will not only like the Perdana’s elegant looks, they will also love the drive. I am looking to getting behind the wheel myself before too long!


Let the new car, and the new management of Proton, be judged on their merits. I know that we all wish them every success in growing their sales, in leading in innovation, and ensuring the company has a bright future, both in terms of its products and the well-being of its hard-working employees.


Ladies and gentlemen,


Before I conclude, I would like to thank Proton and its workers for their efforts and contribution to the automotive sector. I’m sure the company will continue to innovate and improve, to produce the best cars for Malaysians and customers abroad.


My thanks also to the Cabinet Ministers and the Special Task Force who have taken up this additional responsibility to help monitor and ensure that Proton is back on track with the turnaround plan.


With the launch of this new Perdana, Proton can prove that it is a serious player in the automotive industry, and will continue to have a major role in the development of local talent, vendors and entrepreneurs – to the benefit of our economy and our people.


Finally dengan lafaz bismillallah hirahmannirrahim, I officially launch the New Perdana by Proton.


Sekian, wabillahitaufik walhidayah, wassalamualaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh.