                    SPEECH OF H.E. PRESIDENT MARIAN LUPU ON THE OCCASION OF
                       THE 5TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ENERGY COMMUNITY TREATY
                                            (Vienna, 24.10.2011)
YOUR EXCELLENCY MR. VICE‐CHANCELLOR SPINDELEGGER,
YOUR EXCELLENCY COMMISSIONER OETTINGER,
MINISTERS, AMBASSADORS, EXCELLENCIES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
It is really great pleasure for me to welcome you on behalf of the Energy Community Presidency in
Office at this highest level political conference on the occasion of the 5th anniversary of the Energy
Community Treaty. I think that having this event was an excellent initiative of the Secretariat as it
gives us the opportunity to look back within a relatively short period of time, but to recall major
Community developments.
The mere fact that so many friends of the Energy Community are here today to celebrate together,
representing different stakeholders ‐ incl. governments, regulatory authorities, international
organizations, donors, business ‐ is an excellent sign that our common work so far in line with the
Treaty objectives has produced substantial concrete results.
Let me try in this relation to focus your attention on one specific issue i.e. our understanding on what
changed in the Energy Community throughout these five years since the Treaty is into force.
In this aspect, I will elaborate in brief on three major elements of this change.
For us, the representatives of the Contracting Parties, the first thing, which changed, is our own
perception of the Energy Community process. I think nowadays it will be fully justified to say – this is
our process, this is our Community! I am glad to note that there are more and more initiatives,
which appear from the Contracting Parties; there are more and more substantial debates on issues,
which concern the regional developments, there is more flexibility when within these discussions
national interests are concerned – thus, progress is pushed forward with collective efforts on the
ground of solidarity. And this is a major change, which I want to explicitly underline.
The second substantial change concerns the perception for the Energy Community by others. Being
a success story and model for regional cooperation is a definition, which we all like to hear and which
is gladly noted by our partners. In addition, however, we are pleased to note that the formulas, used
in the Energy Community, are also considered within other cooperation formats, which concern
other countries, e.g. INOGATE, Eastern Partnership etc.
The third very important change is related to the expansion of the Energy Community – and this
concerns in particular the acquis, the members and the stakeholders actively involved.
Once it was clear that the established model works efficiently, we noted that the list of acquis to be
implemented was substantially increased ‐ topics like security of supply, energy efficiency, the 3rd
internal energy market package were added to those, specified by the Treaty. Further, new areas of
work were launched – social issues, oil, statistics are actively elaborated.
                                                                                                       1

The Community underwent its concrete enlargement when having Moldova in 2010 and Ukraine in
2011 as its members. This step changed even the geographic concept of the Energy Community and
in real terms indicated that such enlargement is not only possible, but also very efficient, and can be
without any doubt further continued.
Expansion, however, has one other dimension – we have more and more stakeholders involved.
Thus, for us it is of concrete importance to note that the business becomes more active in the Energy
Community context. Having the Investors Advisory Panel in place, recalling the involvement of
individual companies in promoting the rule of law, noting the active participation in the Energy
Community Fora – all these forms of active participation of the business are certainly most welcome
and we expect its further active involvement.
EXCELLENCIES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
I believe you will agree with me that all these changes could not have been reality without the
support of our friends ‐ the European Commission and the Donors’ Community.
The European Commission has concrete obligations under the Treaty to act as coordinator,
concerning the major activities within the Energy Community platform. In real terms, the fact that
our commitments are linked to implementing EU acquis makes this role of concrete practical
importance. And we shall continue to rely on it.
In addition, we rely also on the support, provided by the Donors, which have clearly proved their
readiness to give us concrete and operational support as to follow the Treaty obligations.
Finally, I would not miss to mention the role of the Energy Community Secretariat, which has always
demonstrated its professional support as to help us meeting the Treaty obligations. This very often
happens in a specific economic, political and administrative environment, but the Secretariat has
always succeeded to find the best way forward taking due note of the interests of all stakeholders.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
Let me in conclusion on behalf of the Energy Community Presidency in office to express our
gratefulness for your support to the Energy Community process throughout the years.
And thank you very much once again for being here with us today as to celebrate this important
anniversary.
                                                                                                      2

