               United Nations                                                                                                     A /67/PV.10
               General Assembly
asdf           Sixty-seventh session
               10th plenary meeting
               Wednesday, 26 September 2012, 3 p.m.
                                                                                                                               Offi cial Records
               New York
President:     Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)
     In the absence of the President, Mr. Román-Morey                       conflicts and armed confrontation have been furthered.
     (Peru), Vice-President, took the Chair.                                Countries like Liberia, Sierra Leone and Côte d’Ivoire
                                                                            are now making strides towards peacebuilding and the
     The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.                              rule of law.
                                                                                   In Libya, a ruthless tyranny in place for more than 40
Address by Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón,
                                                                            years was dismantled in a process in which the Security
President of the Republic of Colombia
                                                                            Council played a decisive role. My Government did
     The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The                           not hesitate to condemn the violent repression of the
Assembly will now hear an address by the President of                       civilian population justly clamouring for the exercise
the Republic of Colombia.                                                   of their fundamental rights. That is why we joined the
                                                                            Council’s decisions furthering a transition towards
     Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, President of
                                                                            a democracy that, although still fragile, enjoys the
     the Republic of Colombia, was escorted into the
                                                                            support of the international community as it seeks to
     General Assembly Hall.
                                                                            entrench itself. There are still violent groups that want
     The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): On                            to sabotage that process by terrorist methods. I take
behalf of the General Assembly, I have the honour to                        this opportunity to condemn in the strongest terms the
welcome to the United Nations His Excellency Mr. Juan                       despicable attack perpetrated against the United States
Manuel Santos Calderón, President of the Republic of                        consulate in Benghazi. Extremism, terrorism and
Colombia, and to invite him to address the Assembly.                        disregard for human life cannot be allowed to persist.
     President Santos Calderón (spoke in Spanish):                                 Today, the Arab world is experiencing a
Two years ago, during my first address before the                           fundamental political transformation, opening the
Assembly as President of Colombia (see A/65/PV.15), I                       way towards democracy. If the process is to last, it
expressed my country’s aspiration to become a member                        will require respect for people’s rights and the creation
of the Security Council for the period 2011-2012.                           of conditions conducive to sustainable economic
                                                                            development. We hope that participation by citizens,
     We assumed the responsibility of participating in
                                                                            especially women, will continue to increase and foster
making decisions about critical situations that threaten
                                                                            democratic systems and opportunities for development
world peace in a spirit of absolute independence and
                                                                            and welfare.
well aware of the enormous commitment required to
work for international peace and security. It has been                             With regard to the dire situation in Syria for more
a particularly turbulent time, but one during which the                     than a year and half, I must express our deep frustration
aspirations of many peoples who had suffered long                           with the inability of the international community to put
                 This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
                 speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
                 languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
                 of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
                 U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.
12-52207 (E)
*1252207*

A/67/PV.10
an end to the tragedy that every day takes more and more  also held a social forum that brought together people
Syrian lives. From this rostrum, we reiterate our call    from diverse social organizations on the continents.
for an end to the attacks and for a political negotiation
                                                               The Summit of the Americas in Cartagena was
that will meet the legitimate aspirations of all sectors
                                                          characterized by frank and open dialogue about the
of Syrian society. Implementing Kofi Annan’s six-point
                                                          most crucial issues for the region and the world. The
plan would greatly contribute to facilitating a Syrian-
                                                          Governments of the Americas agreed to undertake
led political transition. We strongly support the new
                                                          an analysis and discussion of the track record,
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
                                                          effectiveness and future prospects of the so-called war
and the League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
                                                          on drugs, as well as possible alternatives to it. It is our
and wish him much success in his very complex and
                                                          duty to question with scientific objectivity whether we
difficult task.
                                                          are doing the best we can or if there are better options
     As a representative of a country that is currently   to more effectively combating the scourge. To that end,
a member of the Security Council, I would like to         we mandated the Organization of American States
briefly turn to the matter of its reform, which has       to begin an analysis and discussion, inviting other
been under discussion for 20 years. Colombia believes     entities — the first of which would be, of course, the
that consensus should be our guide in developing a        United Nations — to participate.
comprehensive approach that includes change in both
                                                               That is only a first step, but it is of great importance
the Council’s composition and its working methods so
                                                          because it is the beginning of a discussion that the
as to promote more effectively the United Nations goals
                                                          world has avoided for many years. We hope that it will
of peace, well-being and humanity.
                                                          ultimately yield concrete results. The debate about
     In our hemisphere, one country that requires         drugs that have caused so much harm throughout the
comprehensive peacebuilding is Haiti. We continue to      world and to my country must be frank and, most
work for Haiti. Its recovery will require our continuous  certainly, global.
support in strengthening its capacities, institutions
                                                               Similarly, in my statement before the General
and productivity so as to generate employment, reduce
                                                          Assembly two years ago, I expressed my conviction
extreme poverty and promote the United Nations work
                                                          that the dawning decade should be the decade of
for development in the country. I urge everyone to
                                                          Latin America and the Caribbean — a decade that
persevere in that cause.
                                                          would consolidate that region of the world as a region
     A key event for the world this year was the United   of peace, progress and solutions for the rest of the
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development             planet. Today, we are pleased to note that our region
(Rio+20). Inspired by the Millennium Development          is indeed experiencing a favourable moment with solid
Goals model, Colombia led the proposal to establish       economies, functional democracies and no current
the sustainable development goals, which was the          conflict among the nations of which it is formed.
most important outcome of the Rio+20 process. Today,
                                                               Regional coordination mechanisms of relatively
the sustainable development goals promise to be a
                                                          recent establishment, such as the Union of South
fundamental component of the planet’s development
                                                          American Nations and the Community of Latin
agenda, and the Secretary-General himself has
                                                          American and Caribbean States, are evidence of the
identified them as one of the five priorities of his
                                                          resolve of our countries and peoples to cooperate. I
legacy. We are therefore especially pleased that our
                                                          would like to highlight the enormous potential of the
Foreign Minister has been invited to be a member of the
                                                          Pacific Alliance that was formalized this year among
high-level panel on the post-2015 development agenda,
                                                          Mexico, Peru, Colombia and Chile. The Alliance is
which held its first meeting yesterday.
                                                          open to the participation of other States with which we
     This year, the sixth Summit of the Americas gathered seek to strengthen not only trade but also political and
in Colombia, with 30 Heads of State and Government        human ties, as well as to the nations of the immense
from the western hemisphere in attendance. It was a       Pacific basin.
fruitful gathering, which for the first time we organized
                                                               I cannot conclude without referring to the special
simultaneously with a business summit attended by the
                                                          moment that our country is currently experiencing.
leaders of the premier companies of the Americas. We
                                                          Against the backdrop of international turbulence, we
2                                                                                                               12-52207

                                                                                                       A/67/PV.10
have been successful in maintaining a healthy economy         With regard to my statement today, a few days ago I
that has generated over 2 million new jobs over the      asked the Colombian people through social media what
course of two years, attesting to the major progress     message they wanted me to bring here to the General
we have made in reducing poverty. We have put in         Assembly. Among the many messages I received, I
place initiatives of great social impact, such as a law  want to share one from my compatriot Henry Rodríguez
for victims, which is the only legislation in the world  Chacón: “An entire generation wants to wake up one
that seeks to return lands to displaced peasants and     day to the news of a peace agreement.” That is the most
to compensate the victims of a conflict that remains     heartfelt wish of the Colombian people.
ongoing; or major hydrocarbon and mining royalties
                                                              Aware that the process must have brief deadlines
reform to more fairly distribute the revenues generated
                                                         and precise terms if it is to be successful, I trust that
by such activities, and thereby promote more effective
                                                         I will be able to deliver to the Assembly next year a
social development.
                                                         positive outcome of the effort, which we undertake
     Nevertheless, our progress, which has been          enthusiastically with a view to ending our 50-year
remarkable, has been curtailed by an absurd conflict     conflict.
that has now lasted half a century. Today, Colombia
                                                              We do not want to talk just about peace; we want
is suffering through the most prolonged internal
                                                         to build conditions for peace. That is what we are doing
armed conflict in its hemisphere, indeed perhaps one
                                                         on a daily basis with the actions of our Government and
of the longest-lasting in the world — an ever-more
                                                         now with the talks that we are initiating. Today, with
anachronistic and inexplicable conflict. Above all, it
                                                         great hope, we present the world with this new special
is inexplicable in the light of the development of our
                                                         moment for my country, Colombia.
democracy and of our social progress.
                                                              The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf
     Aware of that, and without neglecting the
                                                         of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the President
protection and security of the Colombian people and
                                                         of the Republic of Colombia for the statement he has
without ceding an inch in the fight against terrorism
                                                         just made.
and crime, my Government is resolved to move forward
prudently, seriously and firmly, and without repeating        Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, President of
the mistakes of the past, by entering into conversations      the Republic of Colombia, was escorted from the
with the guerrilla forces in order to achieve an end to       General Assembly Hall.
the armed conflict.
                                                         Address by His Majesty King Mswati III, Head of
     After two years of exploratory contacts, we have
                                                         State of the Kingdom of Swaziland
announced to the country and to the world that a
phase of talks will be initiated on a short and concrete      The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
agenda, which we hope will allow us to achieve the       Assembly will now hear an address by the Head of
desired outcome. The talks will begin in Oslo during     State of the Kingdom of Swaziland.
the first half of October and will continue in Havana,
                                                              His Majesty King Mswati III, Head of State of
thanks to the goodwill of the Governments of Norway
                                                              the Kingdom of Swaziland, was escorted into the
and Cuba, which will serve as guarantors. We will also
                                                              General Assembly Hall.
have the backing of the Government of Venezuela, to
which we are grateful for its valuable support, and of        The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
the Government of Chile, which will be working with      General Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the
us during the second phase.                              United Nations His Majesty King Mswati III, Head of
                                                         State of the Kingdom of Swaziland, and to invite him to
     Today, before the General Assembly, I wish to
                                                         address the Assembly.
thank the international community for the support it has
expressed at outset of the talks and for its willingness      King Mswati: It is an immense pleasure for me
to cooperate and help in any way that is necessary. We   to join other Heads of State and Government at this
embark upon the talks with moderate optimism and in      sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly. I should
the absolute conviction that it is an opportunity that   like to begin by congratulating the President upon
we cannot squander to achieve a peace that is good not   his election to steer the work of the Assembly at this
only for Colombia but for the entire region.
12-52207                                                                                                         3

A/67/PV.10
session. His experience and abilities are well known           In our efforts to address global economic challenges,
and respected. We have full confidence that he will       we should be conscious of the social implications of
take the Organization to greater heights. The Kingdom     some of the proposed solutions. Our strategies should
of eSwatini is ready to give him all the support that he  not create more hardship, but rather find answers that
deserves in carrying out this mammoth task.               mitigate the difficulties we face. I am confident that,
                                                          with our wealth of different experiences, we stand
     I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
                                                          to benefit from valuable strategies, especially from
detailed report on the work of the Organization (A/67/1).
                                                          those States that have not been seriously affected by
We have seen the staff of the United Nations working
                                                          the financial crisis. We urge those countries to share
very hard, sometimes in very difficult and hostile
                                                          their experiences for the benefit of all Member States.
environments, dedicating their service to helping those
                                                          The Kingdom of eSwatini calls on the United Nations
who require our assistance and support. The Kingdom
                                                          to consider making these challenges among its top
of eSwatini commends the Secretary-General and his
                                                          priorities during this session.
dedicated team for working tirelessly to ensure the
realization of all aspirations of the Organization.            The Kingdom of eSwatini last month converged
                                                          on Sibaya for dialogue on social, economic and
     As we gather here, we must always remember
                                                          political issues with a view to crafting solutions and
that the role of the United Nations is to keep peace
                                                          agreeing on a way forward that would best improve our
throughout the world, to develop and to help nations to
                                                          livelihoods. Sibaya is a place where every citizen is free
work together in resolving challenges such as hunger,
                                                          to participate irrespective of gender, creed, religion or
unemployment, conflicts, disease and illiteracy, among
                                                          affiliation, among other things. We believe in the full
others. The United Nations also aims to be the centre
                                                          participation of all citizens at the grass-roots level in the
for harmonizing the actions of nations to achieve our
                                                          decision-making process. This forum is an institution
aspirations.
                                                          where key national pronouncements are made and
     We are meeting here at a time when the whole         national sustainable development strategies conceived.
world is facing numerous challenges, such as the          Our national Constitution and National Development
economic and financial crisis. The Kingdom of             Strategy are outputs of this structure. This practice has
eSwatini believes that the United Nations is the          been passed on from generation to generation, and has
appropriate forum to deliberate on these challenges       continued to serve us well, since it allows the people to
in order to come up with united global solutions. As      contribute to their own welfare.
part of the global community, the Kingdom of eSwatini
                                                               Like many other States Member of the Organization,
has not been spared from this economic predicament.
                                                          the Kingdom of eSwatini has been working hard
Our social development programmes that enhance the
                                                          towards the ratification of United Nations conventions,
delivery of the Millennium Development Goals and
                                                          as well as of continental and regional protocols. I am
national projects, such as job creation and poverty
                                                          pleased to inform the Assembly that the Sibaya forum
alleviation strategies, have been adversely affected
                                                          provided the whole nation with an opportunity to
by the prevailing situation. The gains we have made
                                                          discuss those conventions and protocols, which have
in the fight against HIV and AIDS through the rollout
                                                          since been ratified by Parliament and deposited with
of antiretroviral treatments remain threatened by the
                                                          the Secretary-General. We are pleased that we can now
uncertainty around the financial sustainability of the
                                                          be counted among the countries that have successfully
programme.
                                                          ratified United Nations conventions and protocols.
     We wish to acknowledge the support we continue
                                                               The world we live in has become a complicated
to receive from the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS,
                                                          place with the advent of modern technology. We remain
Tuberculosis and Malaria in mitigating all diseases.
                                                          faced with the challenge of how best to take advantage
The Fund has gone a long way in injecting resources
                                                          of this technology, such as social media, to promote
into our national programme of promoting health as
                                                          peace and stability. If there is anything we need to do, it
a key national priority. The need to work together to
                                                          is to promote peace in the world. It is true, and we fully
overcome these challenges could not have been more
                                                          agree with the assertion that there is no need to promote
essential.
                                                          violence of any kind, be it the killing of diplomats, the
                                                          forced removal of Governments, or any other form. In
4                                                                                                             12-52207

                                                                                                           A/67/PV.10
this world, we must all live together in peace, whether as       We must commend the recent positive developments
Muslims, Christians or any other traditional believers.     with regard to relations between the Republic of
We must learn to respect each other irrespective of         China on Taiwan and mainland China, which are
race, creed or religious affiliation. If we practiced those steadily improving. Indeed, it is very encouraging
principles, the world would be altogether a different       as it demonstrates that the tensions between the two
and better place. As human beings, we must turn the         countries have subsided. We hope that one day they
page, forget the past and live together for the benefit of  will be able to resolve all of their differences and live
generations to come.                                        happily with each other. We are witnessing increasing
                                                            trade, as well as flights, between the two countries.
     On the African continent, we are encouraged by
                                                            Recently, it was also interesting to see mainland China
the concerted efforts of our fellow brothers and sisters
                                                            host an African summit, to which the countries that are
who are committed to resolving their differences in
                                                            friends of Taiwan were also invited.
a peaceful manner. We encourage speedy resolutions
in areas where pockets of conflict remain, such as the           As an African country, we would like to thank
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and some        mainland China for its continued support to African
North African countries, to mention but a few.              countries. We have no doubt that the potential of the
                                                            two peoples working together side by side will make
     The Assembly knows that Somalia has also been
                                                            a significant difference in the world. We hope that the
without a stable Government for a long time, and we
                                                            new developments will pave the way for Taiwan to
hope that new developments will bring about lasting
                                                            participate fully in all United Nations entities, because
peace. In that vein, the Kingdom of eSwatini welcomes
                                                            the people of Taiwan desire to become part of the global
the recent development that has taken place in Somalia.
                                                            community.
We hope that the election of the President will bring the
desired stability.                                               Peace will continue to elude us until we properly
                                                            address the issue of weapons of mass destruction.
     We extend the call for peace beyond Africa, to the
                                                            It is clear that those weapons are not necessary to
Middle East, where we continue to witness conflict. The
                                                            humankind. Their mere presence is a recipe for conflict
war in Syria has claimed the lives of too many citizens
                                                            as each country seeks to gain power over others. The
and must come to an end. We appeal to the people of
                                                            Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Syria to discourage the use of force in resolving their
                                                            adopted by many Member States, must be enforced to
differences. We encourage the use of dialogue in cases
                                                            ensure the complete elimination of these weapons.
where they do not see eye to eye. We implore the Syrian
Government and the other stakeholders to sit down in             We have not seen any tangible proof of compliance
dialogue in order to find a lasting solution to the current with the internationally agreed time frames, which
impasse. The barrel of the gun will bring nothing but       is a cause for serious concern requiring urgent
misery.                                                     attention. The mere existence of those weapons creates
                                                            unnecessary tension that could result in a very hostile
     The United Nations and the League of Arab States
                                                            world environment. We implore those countries
have sent a Joint Special Representative to work with
                                                            endowed with uranium resources to use them for other
the people of Syria. We hope that all stakeholders will
                                                            essential economic development needs, such as power
make good use of the Joint Special Representative
                                                            generation.
towards finding a peaceful and lasting solution to their
differences. The Kingdom of eSwatini urges States                The Kingdom of eSwatini recognizes the important
Members of the United Nations to work together in           role that the Security Council plays in the pursuit of
supporting all efforts aimed at helping the people of       international peace and security. The Charter of the
Syria to resolve the conflict.                              United Nations clearly stipulates an international order
                                                            that ensures the rule of law. We call upon the General
     We also note that the Israel-Palestine conflict
                                                            Assembly at this session to deliberate on Security
remains unresolved. A peaceful settlement of the issue
                                                            Council reform, as not all regions are well represented.
is deeply desired and urgently necessary. Our position
                                                            We wish to reiterate the African position on the Security
is unambiguous. The most viable solution is to have the
                                                            Council, claiming two seats in the permanent category
two States of Israel and Palestine coexisting side by
                                                            and five seats in the non-permanent category. The
side in peace and harmony.
                                                            full representation of all regions in the Council will
12-52207                                                                                                            5

A/67/PV.10
ensure that we all own the decisions of that important     Guatemala, and inviting him to address the General
security organ. We should all be given equal treatment.    Assembly.
No region or country should impose its influence over
                                                                President Pérez Molina (spoke in Spanish): At the
others. We wish to see finality in that urgent matter,
                                                           outset, allow me to greet Mr. Vuk Jeremić, President of
since it has dragged on for a very long time now.
                                                           the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. At
     The high-level meeting on sustainable energy for      the same time, I would like to express my appreciation
all, which was held alongside this session, gave Heads     to Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser for his stewardship
of State and Government a forum to deliberate on issues    during the previous session.
that promote the protection of our environment. That
                                                                I have the honour to represent Guatemala for
meeting provided us with an opportunity to revisit the
                                                           the first time before this highest organ of the United
commitments made towards sustainable energy for all.
                                                           Nations. Guatemala, and my Government in particular,
     The destruction of the environment has had            will always support any initiative that furthers the
devastating effects on many of our countries. The          noble objectives and principles of the United Nations,
United Nations must expedite the processes towards         summarized in the words “peace”, “development” and
protecting the environment by enforcing the use of         “human rights”.
environmentally friendly technologies and practices by
                                                                My country is committed to the peaceful settlement
Member States. We call upon the developed countries
                                                           of conflicts, which is the central theme of our debate.
to honour their commitments made prior to the United
                                                           In that spirit, in late 2008 we agreed to sign a special
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio
                                                           agreement with our neighbour, Belize, seeking a
de Janeiro.
                                                           resolution of a long-standing territorial dispute through
     Finally, allow me to say that as we meet during       the International Court of Justice. Our Congress
this session, let us adopt resolutions that will provide   unanimously approved the agreement, and on October
lasting solutions to the challenges faced by humankind     6, 2013, simultaneous plebiscites will be held in both
the world over. We wish the United Nations every           countries to democratically ratify our commitment to
success as it pursues its objective of creating a peaceful resorting to the International Court of Justice.
environment and coexistence among all the nations of
                                                                Furthermore, we Guatemalans lived through an
the world. Let honesty, peace, stability and tolerance
                                                           armed conflict that lasted 36 years. I was a soldier who
prevail across the globe.
                                                           participated in that conflict. And because I know war, I
     The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf    highly value dialogue. That is why in 1996 I was one of
of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the Head of       the signatories of the peace accords in my country. That
State of the Kingdom of Swaziland for the statement he     motivates me to reaffirm my support for the President’s
has just made.                                             wise decision to convene this session to discuss the
                                                           peaceful settlement of conflicts.
     His Majesty King Mswati III, Head of State of
     the Kingdom of Swaziland, was escorted from the            My Government has set three overarching objectives
     General Assembly Hall.                                in order to advance firmly and sustainably towards a
                                                           Guatemala that fully enjoys the benefits of peace. First,
Address by Mr. Otto Fernando Pérez Molina,                 we have proposed the Hambre Zero initiative, which
President of the Republic of Guatemala                     seeks to reduce the chronic malnutrition that affects
                                                           over 40 per cent of our children below five years of age.
     The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
                                                           That reduction will be sustainable only if we are able to
Assembly will now hear an address by the President of
                                                           better develop our rural areas in order to permanently
the Republic of Guatemala.
                                                           reduce the poverty of families living off the land,
     Mr. Otto Fernando Pérez Molina, President of          particularly indigenous families.
     the Republic of Guatemala, was escorted into the
                                                                Secondly, my Government is promoting a pact
     General Assembly Hall.
                                                           for security, justice and peace, which seeks to reduce
     The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I have       the social violence that afflicts our country. In taking
great pleasure in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Otto        office, I found a country with high levels of violence;
Fernando Pérez Molina, President of the Republic of        as a result, reducing those levels has become a priority
6                                                                                                            12-52207

                                                                                                            A/67/PV.10
of my Government. We are certain that we can attain        phenomenon, and it is for that reason that I raise it in
progress in that area, since the indicators over the past  this universal forum.
nine months alone already show a notable decrease of
                                                                It seems that the basic premise of our war against
13 per cent in the number of homicides compared to the
                                                           drugs has serious shortcomings since, unfortunately, it
same period last year. I can therefore state that, without
                                                           has not been possible to eradicate drug consumption. I
being satisfied with those indices, we are nonetheless
                                                           believe that the time has come to accept this fact and to
moving in the right direction in fulfilling our promise
                                                           adapt our fight against the scourge in such a way as to
of reducing the levels of violence and increasing
                                                           take into account the new realities.
security in Guatemala in an environment of full respect
for human rights. In this endeavour, we work closely            Our youth, the group most affected by drug
with neighbouring countries, and especially with our       consumption, demands more effective responses from
Central American brothers.                                 us. Let us realize that the problem is more a public
                                                           health issue than a matter for criminal justice and
     Thirdly, we are campaigning on the economic
                                                           deal with it accordingly. We must offer treatment,
front through the Fiscal and Competitiveness Pact.
                                                           prevention, social protection, economic opportunities
Fiscal affairs have been one of the weaknesses of our
                                                           and development for the communities involved in the
institutional arrangement, and for this reason, during
                                                           drug market. Let us not fill our jails with thousands of
the very first days of my Government we successfully
                                                           young people, who would have a different kind of life
promoted a fiscal reform, approved by Congress, that
                                                           if we were to approach the problem in a different way. I
increased our fiscal receipts by 15 per cent, allowing
                                                           invite the Member States assembled here to jointly seek
us to maintain a stable macroeconomic environment
                                                           avenues that will enable us to offer our young people a
by reducing the fiscal deficit without having to reduce
                                                           more promising future, improving their opportunities
public expenditures. At the same time, fiscal stability
                                                           for a better life and at the same time reducing violence
is allowing us to stimulate private investments that
                                                           and poverty.
generate employment opportunities; that is, dependable
jobs, as demanded by our citizens.                              Fifty years provides sufficient time for us to
                                                           evaluate results, to gauge what we have achieved and to
     Unfortunately, our efforts in relation to the three
                                                           conclude why we do not have the results we had hoped
challenges previously mentioned — lowering chronic
                                                           for. In that regard, I also call on Member States to review
malnutrition among children, reducing violence, and
                                                           the international regulations that currently govern our
promoting employment — are nullified in part by the
                                                           global policies regarding drugs. The Single Convention
scourge of drug trafficking. At least 40 per cent of the
                                                           on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, as amended by the 1972
homicides in our country are linked to the illicit drug
                                                           Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
traffic, and my Government is obligated to allocate
                                                           of 1971 and the United Nations Convention against
scarce fiscal resources to combat transnational gangs
                                                           Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
that operate between the producing countries in the
                                                           Substances of 1988 must be evaluated on the basis of its
South and the consuming countries in the North.
                                                           results and brought up to date to allow us to achieve the
Moreover, my country has gradually been transformed
                                                           desired outcomes. That is a serious challenge that must
into a producer and a consumer of drugs, thereby
                                                           be addressed in all earnestness so that we can have a
compounding an already difficult situation.
                                                           respectful and frank multilateral dialogue, informed by
     The existing framework, born out of the               clear scientific evidence regarding the best strategies
international conventions adopted during the past          available to ensure that our young people are protected
five decades and currently in force, has not achieved      from the scourge of drugs.
the desired results. The consumption markets expand
                                                                In that regard, last April the Heads of State and
instead of decreasing; the number of producer countries
                                                           Government of the Western Hemisphere met for the
and the type of drugs available tend to multiply; and the
                                                           Summit of the Americas in Cartagena de Indias. Our
routes chosen for marketing and trafficking are trending
                                                           host, Mr. Santos Calderón, President of Colombia,
towards diversification. The drug problem is growing in
                                                           invited us to discuss new avenues to combat drug
size and complexity. It involves an increasing number
                                                           trafficking. The agreement reached was that we should
of countries and persons. Clearly, it is a transnational
                                                           undertake studies to assess new alternatives, which we
12-52207                                                                                                             7

A/67/PV.10
would discuss next year, in June, at a meeting of the       law. In that regard, I indicated that Guatemala would
Organization of American States in Guatemala. That          fulfil its duties on the Security Council responsibly and
is a step in the right direction and one that we believe    in a constructive spirit. I believe that so far we have
should be emulated at the global level.                     kept that promise, and we are pleased that in six days
                                                            Guatemala will assume the presidency of the Council
     In the same spirit, Guatemala would like to propose
                                                            for the month of October, and we will continue to act
the establishment of a group of countries that are well
                                                            responsibly.
disposed to reforming global policies on drugs. The
group would bring together Governments that are                  Thirdly, regarding the events of recent weeks, we
interested in promoting in appropriate international        reject all acts that defame religions. At the same time,
forums an objective and rigorous assessment of              we condemn violence in any form, including assaults
prevailing policies and inconsidering new, creative         on diplomatic missions. Such expressions of intolerance
and innovative alternatives. We must seek such new          offend us all.
avenues responsibly and tenaciously, and I am sure that
                                                                 Finally, I would like to recall that, on 21 December,
with the cooperation of all producing, consuming and
                                                            Guatemala will celebrate the beginning of a new era
transit countries, we will succeed.
                                                            according to the Mayan calendar. That era, 13 Baktun,
     Allow me to stress that it is not a matter of          marks the start of a very positive new age that will
abandoning the fight against the scourge of drugs.          enable and invite us to renew physical and spiritual
Rather, it is a matter of arming ourselves better and       energies in an atmosphere of peace, cooperation and
responding with greater effectiveness and clarity,          dialogue. All heads of State and Government are invited
because our children and grandchildren deserve a more       to join us in Tikal National Park to share in the dawn of
integrated and effective response from the international    this new era. The Mayans of yesterday and today, and
community.                                                  all Guatemalans, await them with open arms.
     I would like to conclude my thoughts by reaffirming         The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf
that Guatemala will not renege on any international         of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the President
commitments to which it is party. We have no desire         of the Republic of Guatemala for the statement he has
for unilateral action, which would only sow chaos and       just made.
conflict when the response should be a global one. We
                                                                 Mr. Otto Fernando Pérez Molina, President of
will wait patiently to change our policies in Guatemala
                                                                 the Republic of Guatemala, was escorted from the
until the international community moves forward
                                                                 General Assembly Hall.
and arrives at a new consensus. At the same time,
however, I commit my leadership to moving forward
                                                            Address by Mr. Andry Nirina Rajoelina, President
on evaluating the global policy on drugs, so as to make
                                                            of the Transition of the Republic of Madagascar
it more effective and based on current international
standards that reflect the challenges and realities of the       The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
twenty-first century.                                       Assembly will now hear an address by the President of
                                                            the Transition of the Republic of Madagascar.
     Before concluding, I would like to briefly raise three
points that I believe to be important to this meeting of         Mr. Andry Nirina Rajoelina, President of the
the General Assembly. First, as a demonstration of our           Transition of the Republic of Madagascar, was
commitment to defending and promoting human rights               escorted into the General Assembly Hall.
on all fronts, on 14 January I said that Guatemala would
                                                                 The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf
seek to ratify the Rome Statute of the International
                                                            of the General Assembly, I have the honour to welcome
Criminal Court and thus become a party to the Statute.
                                                            to the United Nations His Excellency Mr. Andry Nirina
I am pleased to report that, on 2 April, we deposited our
                                                            Rajoelina, President of the Transition of the Republic of
instrument of ratification.
                                                            Madagascar, and to invite him to address the Assembly.
     Secondly, in that same speech, I indicated that
                                                                 President Rajoelina (spoke in French): As
we would make it a priority of our foreign policy to
                                                            President of the Transition of Madagascar, it is a great
contribute to the ideals of democracy, justice and peace,
                                                            honour for me to participate in the general debate of
within a framework of absolute respect for international
                                                            the United Nations for the second time. The theme of
8                                                                                                              12-52207

                                                                                                         A/67/PV.10
the sixty-seventh session is akin to a call for unity,    individuals and institutions, including the State, to the
for shared contemplation and for generally revisiting     adopted and published laws, without distinction as to
existential questions and human values in the face of     social or economic status; on the equality of everyone
situations around the world where peace is extremely      before an independent, impartial justice system; and on
precarious.                                               the harmonization of national laws with international
                                                          human rights standards. No one should be above the
     The last few years have indeed been marked by
                                                          law, and the culture of impunity must be banished.
differences of opinion, political disputes and conflicts
of interest. The world today faces new challenges to           Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria), Vice-President, took the
stability and the maintenance of peace. Various efforts        Chair.
and initiatives have been undertaken to deal with
                                                               National conflicts today transcend borders and are
conflicts that are not homogeneous and disputes that
                                                          becoming international problems. More than ever, the
do not always play out along the same lines. People’s
                                                          role of diplomacy and international negotiations face
interests differ and their approaches are not all equal.
                                                          difficulties. The consequences of disputes play out in a
     Today the list of the forms that global conflicts    number of ways, including with problems of impunity,
take leads us to an obvious reality: geostrategic         instability in the Arab and Muslim world, the case of
variations conform to no one rule, and they are in        Somali piracy, illegal immigrations, persons displaced
perpetual flux. The wise words of Secretary-General       by war, problems regarding the Rom issue, religious
Ban Ki-moon in his statement at the opening of the        confrontations, management of land and sea borders,
sixteenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement seem         and food insecurity. It is undeniable that much remains
particularly revealing in that context. Did he not stress to be done to save human lives, because still civilian
that among the challenges that must be met, there are     populations remain the primary victims of conflicts
all too many political disputes between member States     and disputes throughout the world.
of the Non-Aligned Movement itself? Did he not urge
                                                               The world is in upheaval, and many countries are in
the protagonists in the Syrian crisis to immediately
                                                          a situation of transition. Their peoples demand change
institute a ceasefire and a halt to the violence? And yet
                                                          and hope for sustainable development. Those countries
we can only deplore the fact that his call produced no
                                                          need to be supported and encouraged, not sanctioned.
result. Scores of innocent people are still dying every
                                                          In that context, allow me to highlight the case of my
day, and over recent months they now number in the
                                                          own country, Madagascar.
thousands. We firmly condemn this loss of human life.
The Earth continues to run with the blood of innocents,        Madagascar is a country emerging from crisis,
spilled violently not only in Syria but in other parts of thanks to the involvement of the bodies of the Southern
the world as well.                                        African Development Community and the support of
                                                          the African Union, the Indian Ocean Commission and
     Given this state of affairs, despite the complexity
                                                          the International Organization of la Francophonie. A
of the challenges those conflicts present, the Secretary-
                                                          road map was signed and adopted by the Malagasy
General has not stood idle. We can only commend his
                                                          political parties in September 2011. Thus, several
determination to strive tirelessly to seek a negotiated
                                                          significant steps have been taken. The Malagasy parties
settlement. States and other bodies must join forces
                                                          have honoured their commitments. All the transitional
to maintain peace, stability and security in the world.
                                                          institutions have been set up, including a national unity
We cannot be passive witnesses to current or future
                                                          Government and the transitional Parliament. The road
disasters. The Republic of Madagascar sets particular
                                                          map, which we can call a political agreement, has
store by the relevance and importance of the principles
                                                          allowed us to launch the electoral process.
set forth in the United Nations Charter, as a source
of inspiration as well as a pillar of support for the          Madagascar needs to take its destiny into its own
interdependence of nations and peoples. That being the    hands, to write its own history, and to end the cycle of
case, human rights, the law of States, the rule of law    political instability through the holding of credible and
and the other international regulatory tools place before transparent elections, guaranteed by the establishment
leaders their responsibilities.                           of the Independent National Electoral Commission
                                                          of the Transition. Above all, recently, in concert with
     The League of Nations defined the rule of law as a
                                                          United Nations experts, the electoral timetable for
principle of governance based on the submission of all
12-52207                                                                                                          9

A/67/PV.10
Madagascar was officially announced, including the          right to decide who should guide their destiny. The
holding of presidential elections scheduled for 8 May       Malagasy people alone will choose the man or woman
2013. Thus I launch a solemn appeal to all international    who will lead Madagascar.
partners, all Member States and friends of Madagascar
                                                                 If confidence is shown in the Malagasy people, they
to support us and encourage us in that approach, which
                                                            will be grateful. The concepts of non-interference and
is the only and most democratic path forward.
                                                            respect for the sovereignty of each country establish
     Profoundly committed to the values of solidarity,      mutual trust, which is a basic rule for all international
tolerance and peace, Madagascar is now searching for        negotiations. They are among the peaceful means
swift development and a better future. During the three     needed to build lasting peace. Efforts must be made
and a half years of transition and despite all attempts     to put an end to the inequalities in how countries in
at destabilization, we have worked tirelessly every day     political crisis are treated. The realities on the ground
to honour our commitments and ensure the protection         and popular aspirations must be acknowledged in order
of our countrymen, all the while addressing social          to avoid making the wrong decision.
problems. In spite of challenging times, and despite the
                                                                 Despite our disagreements and our differences on
suspension of international aid and subsidies, which
                                                            how to achieve a peaceful settlement of our conflicts,
once accounted for 60 per cent of the State budget, we
                                                            we the States Members of the United Nations are
have been able to keep the administration functioning
                                                            unanimous in our firm desire for peace. The United
normally and have honoured all our commitments and
                                                            Nations system cannot just be the police of the world;
debts.
                                                            it also needs to be a source of hope and of values. Our
     Madagascar is indeed one of the least developed        societies need to exist and find their way through
countries. Nevertheless, it is one of the least indebted    their own values, because it is social and economic
countries in the world since its debt amounts to only       ills, injustice, the lack of protection for vulnerable
5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), compared        populations and intolerance for minorities that often
to other countries whose debt rate can reach up to          cause States to collapse.
238 per cent of GDP. Therefore, it is possible to develop
                                                                 As far as its modest means allow, the Republic of
our country and create our wealth through our own
                                                            Madagascar is determined to contribute to achieving
resources. That is the challenge that we are meeting.
                                                            our shared goals. The peace accord is fragile and needs
     Now it is high time to embark on in-depth reform       to develop. To quote Martin Luther King, Jr., “All
to create an effective system that meets the highest        progress is precarious, and the solution of one problem
expectations of our respective populations — not            brings us face to face with another problem”. It is our
forgetting, obviously, the need to double or even triple    duty and responsibility to provide a better future for the
our commitments to fighting poverty and promoting           generations to come. Global stability requires tolerance,
sustainable development. Here today, I launch an appeal     assistance, the creation and equitable sharing of wealth,
for international solidarity to channel the transition      and poverty reduction through sustainable development
towards the building of a more promising future — but       and reconciliation. The principles of adjustment or
without stifling us.                                        settlement of international disputes by peaceful means
                                                            requires a return to our values, gender balance and
     The Malagasy people need their full and entire
                                                            equality, and, above all, democratic alternation. God
independence, but above all they must be able to
                                                            bless our nation!
hold transparent and therefore democratic elections.
I know that everyone here is sincerely willing to lend           The Acting President: On behalf of the General
us support. So allow me to give the Assembly the            Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Transition
solution. The best way to help us is to trust us, honour    of the Republic of Madagascar for the statement he has
the commitments made and let us shoulder our own            just made.
responsibilities. In the name of universal values and
                                                                 Mr. Andry Nirina Rajoelina, President of the
principles, anyone meeting the conditions of eligibility
                                                                 Transition of the Republic of Madagascar, was
dictated by law is fully entitled to exercise that liberty.
                                                                 escorted from the General Assembly Hall.
That is a fundamental principle, and all States must
respect it. The Malagasy people alone — not other
countries or external pressure — have the sovereign
10                                                                                                            12-52207

                                                                                                          A/67/PV.10
Address by Mr. Nicolae Timofti, President of the          United Nations, the peace in my country was shaken.
Republic of Moldova                                       The armed conflict in the Transnistrian region of the
                                                          Republic of Moldova lasted for five months and caused
      The Acting President: The Assembly will now
                                                          the loss of many lives. It was a tragic period that, while
hear an address by the President of the Republic of
                                                          now past, continues to pose a serious challenge in
Moldova.
                                                          the present. Since the end of the hostilities, Moldova
      Mr. Nicolae Timofti, President of the Republic of   has firmly embarked on the road towards a peaceful
      Moldova, was escorted into the General Assembly     settlement of that conflict. Twenty years of negotiations
      Hall.                                               have strengthened our belief that that is the only viable
                                                          path to follow in order to reach a political settlement.
      The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the United           It is obvious that the perpetuation of the conflict
Nations His Excellency Mr. Nicolae Timofti, President     does not offer any real benefit to the majority of the
of the Republic of Moldova, and to invite him to address  people on either bank of the Nistru river. It undermines
the Assembly.                                             our national security and territorial integrity, hampers
                                                          economic development and divides our society.
      President Timofti (spoke in Moldovan; English
                                                          Moreover, the conflict keeps the population of the
interpretation provided by the delegation): At the
                                                          Transnistrian region in isolation, incites human rights
outset, I would like to congratulate Mr. Vuk Jeremić
                                                          violations and generates economic stagnation on
on his election as President of the General Assembly at
                                                          the left bank of the Nistru. The current political and
its sixty-seventh session and to wish him every success
                                                          economic trends show that preserving the status quo is
in that highly honourable and important role. I am
                                                          not a viable scenario anymore. All of our international
convinced that his rich experience will contribute to the
                                                          partners share the view that there is no alternative to
achievement of significant results in our work together.
                                                          a reunified Moldova. Our message in that regard is
I convey my appreciation as well to his predecessor,
                                                          firm – 20 years are enough to overcome the mistrust of
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, for the exemplary
                                                          the past and it is time to start building a shared future.
manner in which he led the sixty-sixth session. I also
wish to pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-               The key elements in the approach of the Moldovan
moon for his ongoing efforts to revitalize the global     authorities to resolving the conflict are also clear.
role of the United Nations and to bring reforms to the    Our ultimate goal is to reintegrate the Republic of
Organization.                                             Moldova within its internationally recognized borders
                                                          as a functional State with a clear European perspective.
      It is a great honour for me to speak from this
                                                          The Transnistrian region should be granted a special
rostrum for the first time on behalf of the people of
                                                          status within Moldova, which will provide the region
the Republic of Moldova. Twenty-one years ago, my
                                                          with a comfortable level of self-governance. Defining
country broke away from the Soviet empire, and today
                                                          the special status is the core task of the political
it is undergoing a process of democratic transformation,
                                                          negotiations in the “5+2” format. That negotiation
with membership in the European Union as its ultimate
                                                          process should lead to a reasonable compromise based
goal. After a period of several years marked by political
                                                          on the principles of the sovereignty and territorial
turmoil, my country now enjoys political stability,
                                                          integrity of the Republic of Moldova.
which allows it to develop and modernize. We have
firmly defined European integration as our objective           In parallel, we will continue to implement
and have revived the economic and social reforms. Our     confidence-building measures aimed at bringing
priorities are the establishment of the rule of law and   communities from both banks of the Nistru River
comprehensive judicial reform, with an emphasis on        closer to each other. By promoting business links,
fighting corruption, modernization of the economy and     ensuring freedom of movement, protecting human
reintegration of the country.                             rights, improving security and combating criminality,
                                                          we will prepare a better ground for a political solution.
      The support and assistance provided by our
                                                          Transformation of the existing military peacekeeping
European partners from Brussels and United Nations
                                                          mechanism into an international civilian mission aimed
Member States are extremely important for us and
                                                          at building confidence rather than separating the sides
assure us that we are on the right path. Two decades
                                                          has also become an imperative.
ago, on the very day the Republic of Moldova joined the
12-52207                                                                                                          11

A/67/PV.10
    Our international partners provide an essential        and management of conflicts, including protracted
contribution to bringing that conflict to an end. Growing  ones. From that point of view, during this session we
assistance from the European Union is an encouraging       will strongly support the consideration by the General
example in that regard. The negotiation process now        Assembly of the issue of cooperation between the
needs a strong stimulus, and we believe that our           United Nations and regional organizations, particularly
international partners can demonstrate the necessary       the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
political will to that end. We call on the 5+2 format      Europe, the Council of Europe, the Black Sea Economic
negotiators, namely, the Organization for Security         Cooperation Organization and other organizations.
and Cooperation in Europe, the Russian Federation,
                                                                In the same context, considering the distinct
Ukraine, the European Union and the United States of
                                                           objective devoted to democracy and economic
America, to pool their efforts and work together towards
                                                           development, the increased potential and role in economic
the final resolution of the Transnistrian conflict and
                                                           development and regional integration, as well as the
reintegration of the Republic of Moldova.
                                                           strong determination of the countries of the Georgia,
    It is also important to reiterate that Russian forces  Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Moldova (GUAM) Organization
are still present on the territory of the Republic of      for Democracy and Economic Development to actively
Moldova, without the consent of the host country and in    contribute to international security, stability and peace,
breach of the Moldovan Constitution and international      the delegations of its member States have decided to
commitments, and they should be finally withdrawn.         advance for consideration of the General Assembly
                                                           during its current session a draft resolution on
    The universal character of the United Nations and
                                                           cooperation between the United Nations and GUAM.
its unique role in managing international relations
are widely recognized. There is no alternative to               At this stage, the process of development and
this Organization. Yet, globalization and the global       integration of our States is still burdened by some
financial crisis have demonstrated the need to reform      outstanding problems, including unresolved conflicts
the Organization in order to ensure the progressive        in the territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
and sustainable strengthening of the United Nations. I     Georgia and the Republic of Moldova. We reaffirm our
am referring in particular to Security Council reform,     unswerving commitment to finding peaceful solutions
to which a compromise solution should be found. We         to those conflicts on the basis of respect for the
believe that any proposal for its reform should take into  sovereignty and territorial integrity of our countries.
account the legitimate aspirations of all regional groups,
                                                                Promoting the rule of law at the national and
including granting an additional non-permanent seat to
                                                           international levels is at the heart of the United Nations
the Eastern European States.
                                                           mission and is fundamental to achieving durable peace,
    In its capacity as a member of the Human Rights        supporting openness in Government, the effective
Council, the Committee on Conferences, the Policy and      protection of human rights and sustained economic
Programme Coordination Committee, the Committee            growth and development. We emphasize the importance
on Information, the Commission for Population and          of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on
Development and other United Nations elective bodies,      the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
the Republic of Moldova will continue to support           (A/67/PV.3), held on 24 September, and will continue
efforts towards the comprehensive reform of the            to support efforts in that direction during the sixty-
United Nations system and its main bodies and organs,      seventh session. In our view, strengthening the rule of
including the revitalization of the General Assembly       law will help to maintain peace, promote development
and the reform of the Security Council aimed at            and enhance cooperation, and is therefore conducive to
enhancing the efficiency, transparency, accountability     the achievement of the goal of building a harmonious
and representativeness of the system.                      world.
    The relationship between the United Nations and             The non-proliferation of weapons of mass
regional organizations is of paramount importance for      destruction, disarmament and the efficient control of
the maintenance of international peace and security. In    armaments remain vital topics on the international
many instances, all those organizations have unique        cooperation agenda, which need the common
and complementary capacities that, when properly           understanding, political will and engaged efforts of all
coordinated, can contribute decisively to the prevention   States and international organizations. The Republic of
12                                                                                                            12-52207

                                                                                                          A/67/PV.10
Moldova fully supports the international community             Finally, I would like to reiterate that the Republic
in exerting continuous control of and applying the         of Moldova is a strong supporter of the United Nations
necessary preventive measures against unlawful             role in global governance and the management of
attempts to develop weapons of mass destruction and        international crises. We believe in the potential and
their means of delivery, which pose a real threat to       capacities of the United Nations to find adequate
international security and are often used to challenge     responses and take concrete actions aimed at resolving
the existing world order.                                  the ever-increasing global challenges. The Republic of
                                                           Moldova is definitely contributing to that activity.
    The Republic of Moldova established significant
objectives and is undertaking tangible steps in                The Acting President: On behalf of the General
accomplishing its priorities in the field of arms control. Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic
In cooperation with our partners, the Government of        of Moldova for the statement he has just made.
the Republic of Moldova is in the process of adjusting
                                                               Mr. Nicolae Timofti, President of the Republic of
to the best international standards, adopting dual-use
                                                               Moldova, was escorted from the General Assembly
goods export control legislation, improving small arms
and light weapons management for civilians and the             Hall.
military, ensuring proper border management, and
actively cooperating at the regional and international     Address by Mr. Toomas Hendrik Ilves, President of
levels.                                                    the Republic of Estonia
    Military conflicts in different regions of the planet      The Acting President: The Assembly will now
and the global economic crises have brought human          hear an address by the President of the Republic of
rights issues once again to our attention. The principles  Estonia.
of international law and human rights standards can            Mr. Toomas Hendrik Ilves, President of the
be promoted only by joint efforts and decisions. Acts          Republic of Estonia, was escorted into the General
of aggression, including attacks against the personnel         Assembly Hall.
and integrity of diplomatic facilities, represent a
violation of international norms and deserve our firm          The Acting President: On behalf of the General
condemnation. The relevant bodies of the United            Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the United
Nations, including the Human Rights Council, have          Nations His Excellency Mr. Toomas Hendrik Ilves,
sufficient instruments to take action on behalf of States  President of the Republic of Estonia, and to invite him
in order to prevent human rights violations, conduct       to address the Assembly.
country evaluations and provide tailored solutions.            President Ilves: It is an honour once again
    As a member of the Human Rights Council for the        to address the United Nations. This year I would
term of 2010 to 2013 and, as Vice-Chair of the Third       like to focus on responsibility. The recent years of
Committee at its previous session, the Republic of         economic and financial turbulence have demonstrated
Moldova continuously pledges to keep an open mind          a strong correlation between economic prudence and
in furthering the cause of promoting and protecting        responsibility in fiscal matters. We have realized, I
human rights worldwide.                                    hope, that sustainability is not a term we apply only
                                                           to development, but concerns all of us. Responsibility
    The world economic crisis is an incentive              and sustainability apply to the three broad topics I shall
for putting into practice the idea of sustainable          address today: human rights, good governance and
development, which could simultaneously provide            development. But before doing so, I would like to speak
solutions for maintaining the pace of economic growth      about diplomacy.
and prevent climate change. We support the renewal
of the global commitment made at the United Nations            The purpose of diplomacy is to prevent war.
Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de      When diplomats are attacked we are all less secure.
Janeiro, Brazil, and the agreement on establishing the     We know what we are talking about — we too have
sustainable development goals (see resolution 66/288,      had our diplomats attacked, mercifully without the
annex). We believe that promoting a green economy          horrific consequences that occured in Benghazi.
model will help enterprises to reconfigure in order to     Therefore, the recent assaults in many parts of the
streamline natural, human and economic investments.        world on diplomats, embassies and consular premises
12-52207                                                                                                          13

A/67/PV.10
are deplorable. Regardless of their motivations, such       responsibility to protect is not debated. The difficulty,
acts are unjustifiable and must be universally and          however, lies with its application: when Governments
unequivocably condemned. All countries must fulfil          do not live up to their responsibility, the international
their international legal obligation to protect diplomatic  community must react and act.
and consular properties and personnel.
                                                                 The international criminal justice system,
     As recent events have demonstrated, when it            especially the International Criminal Court, plays a
comes to human rights it is not enough merely to keep       crucial role in providing timely and decisive responses
your own house in order. As a conscientious member          to such crimes. Investigations by the Court may deter
of the international community, Estonia feels the           further atrocities, prevent their escalation or accelerate
responsibility to do more globally. That includes paying    their end. It is therefore essential to cooperate with the
attention to human rights violations in places torn by      Court and apprehend those it has indicted.
conflict, as well as doing more to stop and prevent the
                                                                 As a result of the evolving nature of military
violation of the rights of women and the child. It also
                                                            conflicts, civilian casualties tragically are on the
means making the most of new technologies in the
                                                            rise. Among civilians, women and children are the
service of fundamental rights and freedoms. The need
                                                            most vulnerable. When we take that into account,
to take responsibility and do more is also why Estonia
                                                            Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women,
looks forward to becoming a member of the Human
                                                            peace and security, takes on a whole new immediacy.
Rights Council and to working proactively towards the
                                                            Furthermore, conflict-related sexual violence requires
fulfilment of its mandate.
                                                            more attention. Such violence can easily lead to further
     Permit me to touch upon the developments in            war crimes and crimes against humanity. Moreover,
Syria. We have witnessed the complete breakdown of          in advancing the rights of the child, the International
any semblance of the rule of law. We continue to see        Criminal Court’s recent decision to convict Thomas
extensive human rights and international humanitarian       Lubanga Dyilo was a significant achievement and will,
law abuses. It appears that both sides have committed       we hope, have a strong deterrent effect in the future to
serious international crimes. Yet we still see no solution. prevent crimes against children.
We cannot look on and wait for the violence to spread
                                                                 The Crimean War, in the 1850s, brought the world
even more widely. The Security Council — especially
                                                            the first extensive photographic reports of conflicts.
its permanent members — must overcome their
                                                            Today, new media make it even more difficult to hide
differences and find a solution to the bloodshed. The
                                                            war crimes both on and off the battlefield. Modern
least that all parties must do is to allow for humanitarian
                                                            technology brings home the reality and horror of war.
aid to be safely delivered and to guarantee the security
                                                            We must therefore recognize the important role of
of humanitarian workers. Without an end to the armed
                                                            technology in advancing human rights.
conflict, without peace, there can be no political
process.                                                         Freedom of expression is a human right, whether in
                                                            the city square, the press or in cyberspace. For the third
     But it is not only Syria that needs our attention.
                                                            year in a row, Freedom House has ranked Estonia first
We should not avoid the problem of protracted conflicts
                                                            in the world in Internet freedom. We have joined the
that have already waited for years to be solved. We
                                                            coalition Freedom Online, a group of States working
shall speak with one voice against continuing violations
                                                            closely together to advance human rights online. In
of the territorial integrity of sovereign States and for
                                                            addition, Estonia looks forward to discussing actively
the secure return of all forcefully displaced persons.
                                                            matters relating to Internet freedom in the Human
Moreover, more attention to conflict prevention would
                                                            Rights Council, which adopted a resolution on that
help to avoid such violations in the future.
                                                            topic this year (resolution 20/8). The resolution was a
     A stronger commitment to conflict prevention and       genuine milestone affirming that fundamental rights
to the enhancement of the rule of law can help to avoid     in the virtual world must be protected with the same
violent conflicts and the most heinous international        commitment as in the real world.
crimes. Under the principle of the responsibility to
                                                                 Internationally, there are worrisome developments
protect, States committed in 2005 to protect their
                                                            related to Internet governance. Too many countries
people from ethnic cleansing, genocide, war crimes
                                                            speak about the dangers of a free Internet from a
and crimes against humanity. Today the content of the
14                                                                                                            12-52207

                                                                                                            A/67/PV.10
security perspective. The truth is, as we know well,        increasingly necessary to distinguish noise from signal,
that cybersecurity is needed to prevent oppressive          to distinguish genuine data from spin.
Governments and criminals from wreaking havoc. It is
                                                                  I have spoken thus far about what Governments
not to prevent peaceful individuals from speaking their
                                                            can and must do. In our increasingly interconnected,
minds or gathering information and exchanging ideas.
                                                            wired and wireless world, civil society and the private
     Despite having experienced extensive cyber attacks     sector play an ever-greater role. Governments benefit
during the so-called Web War One, five years ago, Estonia   from involving non-governmental organizations,
does not support more rigid regulation and censorship       entrepreneurs and private individuals in governance.
in cyberspace. Estonia is committed to an open, secure      Estonia and many other countries increasingly and
and reliable Internet. It is therefore imperative to ensure successfully do so. The challenge, however, is for the
that the International Telecommunication Union’s new        United Nations system — a multilateral organization
regulation does not lead to the restriction of Internet     based on modern, post-Westphalian States — to embrace
freedom and unnecessary limits to the free flow of ideas    those other actors and to involve them in finding
and information. In fighting cybercrimes, the Budapest      solutions and decision-making.
Convention on Cybercrime provides the appropriate
                                                                  Allow me to continue by sharing some thoughts
and primary legal framework at the global level.
                                                            related to development and responsibility.
     Globally, there is a deficit of good and responsible
                                                                  Sustainable development is not a clichéd utopia;
governance. Its lack is the root cause of countless
                                                            nor is it something forced on us from above. True
other ills. But again, some progress has been made.
                                                            development can be nothing other than sustainable. Yet
I was proud to represent Estonia when I signed on
                                                            we have seen unsustainability masked as development,
to the Open Government Partnership, along with
                                                            despite the contradiction in terms.
representatives of 42 other countries. That multilateral
initiative aims to take concrete steps to institute a new         Consider the global financial crisis. Burdening our
model of governance to maximize the potential of new        children and grandchildren with mountains of debt is
technologies and, most important, to tackle corruption.     immoral, as is living at the expense of others. Growth
                                                            without responsibility is illusory. We have learned that
     The information revolution we experience these
                                                            the hard way. Let us not make the same mistake again.
days has assisted Estonia to successfully and rapidly
transform itself into a rule-of-law-based democratic              We are another year closer to the deadline we set
society. Estonia was the first country where people         ourselves for achieving the Millennium Development
could cast their vote online in parliamentary and           Goals (MDGs). Were they too ambitious? I do not think
municipal elections. Just a few months ago we               so. Aiming high is the least we can do. There is no point
conducted our census for the first time to a large extent   in setting targets that we can be confident of achieving
online. This year more than 90 per cent of taxpayers in     effortlessly. Yet we must resist the temptation to sell
Estonia filed annual income tax returns via the Internet.   everything as a success if that is not the case. Failure to
E-government, e-school, e-medical prescriptions             achieve all the MDGs is no excuse not to set new targets.
and e-parking are examples of Estonian innovation           The world needs sustainable development goals. We are
in the field of citizen-friendly public services. They      still in a preliminary phase of the discussion. Let us aim
increase transparency and help to prevent and cut           high and do our best.
down corruption. They reduce costs. Most importantly,
                                                                  Despite the world’s best efforts, millions
however, they have increased the possibility to exercise
                                                            remain in poverty. The information technology (IT)
fundamental rights and freedoms and improve inclusive
                                                            transformation will create massive opportunities all
and responsible governance. Therefore, Estonia wishes
                                                            over the world. We must, however, avoid a digital
to share its e-governance skills and to continue to
                                                            divide that would stymie this historic chance to
facilitate exchanges with partners worldwide.
                                                            accelerate development in all parts of the world. I was a
     My comments on the need to do more apply to the        member of Kofi Annan’s high-level panel of experts on
United Nations too. Without reform, its global mission      information and communication technology — already
will be unsustainable. We need change, ranging from         a decade ago — and I continue to be concerned about
reforming the United Nations in the broadest sense to       the gap between the digital haves and have-nots,
cutting the waste of paper. In an information age it is     especially because, by investing in IT, countries such as
12-52207                                                                                                             15

A/67/PV.10
mine have leapt into modernity and transparency. New       Malawi. As the Assembly may be aware, I took office
information and communications technologies have the       in April of this year after the death of my predecessor,
potential to trigger the next industrial revolution, but   His Excellency Professor Bingu Wa Mutharika. On
governments cannot achieve it alone.                       behalf of all Malawians, I express our appreciation for
                                                           the support that the world gave us during that difficult
     Entrepreneurs expanding the range of global
                                                           time in our country. I would like to also acknowledge
knowledge networks are key partners in fighting
                                                           in particular the support I received from leaders from
poverty and creating a more transparent economy.
                                                           the Southern African Development Community and the
They can also make an outsized difference in their
                                                           entire African continent when I assumed the presidency.
communities and the world. However, Governments
                                                           The support that I received is a mark that Africa has
must provide a secure and fruitful environment for
                                                           indeed embraced women’s leadership.
those sorts of ideas to emerge and prosper. Twenty-
one years after restoring our independence, Estonia is           Joining the world’s leaders here and becoming only
an example where a combination of responsible free         the second female Head of State in Africa’s history,
enterprise, e-governance, international partnerships       after Her Excellency President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf of
and eco-friendly policies can put a country in the fast    Liberia, is a moment of pride for me. However, mine
lane of development.                                       is not the story of the success of an individual, but of
                                                           a people. A peaceful and constitutional transition of
     Experience shows that if we fail to act responsibly,
                                                           power was not inevitable when my presidency began.
we will, in the end, be forced to do so. Let us begin by
                                                           It is the courage and determination of the people of
acting responsibly.
                                                           Malawi that made it possible. The people of Malawi
     The Acting President: On behalf of the General        have made a decisive choice. They have chosen
Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic    democracy, they have chosen peace and they have
of Estonia for the statement he has just made.             chosen to work together to realize their destiny. It is my
                                                           people’s courage and determination that has taken me
     Mr. Toomas Hendrik Ilves, President of the
                                                           to the presidency, and which we will now apply to our
     Republic of Estonia, was escorted from the General
                                                           national development.
     Assembly Hall.
                                                                 The theme of the general debate this year is “Bringing
Address by Mrs. Joyce Hilda Mtila Banda,                   about adjustment or settlement of international disputes
President of the Republic of Malawi                        or situations by peaceful means”. It allows us to reflect
                                                           on some of the conflict situations around the world,
     The Acting President: The Assembly will now
                                                           including in Africa. Those conflicts have a devastating
hear an address by the President of the Republic of
                                                           effect on the lives of millions, especially women and
Malawi.
                                                           children. The impact of conflict goes beyond the people
     Mrs. Joyce Hilda Mtila Banda, President of the        directly involved, affecting the region and the world.
     Republic of Malawi, was escorted into the General     Let me agree with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
     Assembly Hall.                                        when he said in his reappointment speech that one of
                                                           the greatest opportunities we have for a better world
     The Acting President: On behalf of the General
                                                           without conflict is through sustainable development.
Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the United
Nations Her Excellency Mrs. Joyce Hilda Mtila Banda,             The biggest threats to security and peace are poverty,
President of the Republic of Malawi, and to invite her     lack of opportunity and lack of hope. It is unacceptable
to address the Assembly.                                   to me as the President of Malawi, as it should be to the
                                                           global community, that we have children continuing to
     President Banda: Allow me to congratulate
                                                           suffer from malnutrition, or that they yearn to learn but
the President on his well-deserved election to the
                                                           have to sit under trees rather than in proper classrooms.
presidency of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
                                                           It is unacceptable that a mother should die while giving
session. My delegation and I would like to assure him
                                                           birth because the nearest health centre is far away, or
of Malawi’s full support during his tenure of office.
                                                           that thousands die of diseases that we have answers
     It is an honour to address the Assembly today for the for. It is unacceptable that the youth who represent the
first time in my capacity as President of the Republic of  future of our world have few opportunities to realize
16                                                                                                              12-52207

                                                                                                              A/67/PV.10
their potential, or that they are not guaranteed a society  macroeconomic issues, but also secure Malawi’s ability
where they can speak their mind. It is unacceptable that    to meet the MDG targets.
farmers and other workers continue to toil to make the
                                                                 I would like to share that we are certain that we will
best of what they have, but do not enjoy the fruits of
                                                            be able to achieve five of the eight MDGs by 2015. And
their labour due to lack of modernization, a supportive
                                                            we will continue to strive to achieve our goals of the
policy environment and access to markets; and that
                                                            three remaining MDGs: universal primary education,
they are buried under global tariffs and taxes. It is when
                                                            promoting gender equality and empowering women,
those frustrations are in place that conflict takes root.
                                                            and improving maternal health. Coincidentally, these
     For decades, I have fought these issues in Malawi      three MDGs are related to issues that I have worked on
as a social justice and human rights activist and           throughout my life, and I will personally ensure that
through my work at the gra-ssroots. I have experienced      Malawi redoubles its efforts to make improvements in
the struggles of the poor and the suffering of Malawian     those areas.
women. I have championed the advancement of the
                                                                 My Government realizes that the potential of
oppressed and marginalized, fought for the rights of
                                                            Malawi — the potential of our land, our resources
women and children, campaigned for the betterment of
                                                            and, most importantly, our people — is great. But
the rural and urban poor. I can attest to the fact that
                                                            that opportunity will be seized only through our own
the experience of a poor and disadvantaged Malawian
                                                            efforts. That is why my vision is not just hopeful words.
is intimately intertwined with that of Africans, and
                                                            Our willingness to take tough decisions does not end
indeed with that of the people of the least developed
                                                            here. Our plans need to be translated into action. To that
countries.
                                                            end, within my first 100 days in office, Malawi held an
     Now, as the President of the Republic of Malawi,       inclusive national dialogue on the economy to narrow
I have a vision. My vision is to eradicate poverty          down five priority sectors within our medium-term
through economic growth and wealth creation. Malawi         national development framework, the Malawi Growth
aims to create wealth by transforming the structure of      and Development Strategy II. The five priorities are
the economy, promoting the private sector in order to       energy, tourism, agriculture, mining and infrastructure
achieve economic growth, accelerating job creation          development.
and protecting the vulnerable and the excluded within a
                                                                 Central to those priorities is our emphasis on
decentralized and democratic environment.
                                                            delivery through partnership with the private sector.
     Specifically, my vision is to transform Malawi         We will facilitate that by making changes aimed
into one of the fastest-growing African economies in        at improving the business climate. My Cabinet has
the next decade. For me, growth is not merely related       identified three specific projects within each priority
to gross domestic product. Growth is about wealth and       sector and translated that into an implementation
prosperity for all, opportunity for all, happiness for all, plan for the next two years. The projects range from
political and economic freedom for all. Growth is also      the completion of essential roads and rail lines, to
about growing the number of children in school and          setting up alternative energy sources and undertaking
young people in jobs. Growth is about increasing the        business climate reform to attract investment into
number of mothers who give safe birth in a hospital and     agro-processing and mining. The projects will set our
of growing the number of families who have plenty of        country on a path of fulfilling its full potential.
food.
                                                                 In addition, I have also launched two initiatives — the
     As the Assembly may be aware, for the past             Presidential Initiative on Maternal Health and Safe
three years Malawi has faced severe economic and            Motherhood, and the Presidential Initiative on Poverty
social challenges brought on by poor political and          and Hunger Reduction — to fast-track the interventions
economic governance, which could have impacted our          needed to address the social needs of disadvantaged
ability to accelerate the attainment of the Millennium      groups, especially women and youth.
Development Goals (MDGs). Therefore, upon assuming
                                                                 Malawi refuses to accept what others may consider
office I immediately put in place an economic recovery
                                                            to be our destiny — the status of underdevelopment.
programme to restore macroeconomic stability in the
                                                            Malawi is committed to change that perception. But in
country so that we can not only address our immediate
                                                            so doing, my Government and, indeed, the people of
12-52207                                                                                                              17

A/67/PV.10
Malawi know that we need to engage the rest of the        sustainable development. The implementation of these
global community. That is why, within days of taking      agreements is very crucial for our future.
office, I reopened dialogue and engagement with our
                                                              Finally, on the issue of the reform of the United
neighbours, with African leaders and with the rest of the
                                                          Nations, Malawi fully supports the expansion of the
world. The people of Malawi are grateful for the good
                                                          Security Council in both permanent and non-permanent
will that many have shown us, and we are encouraged
                                                          categories. As members of the Assembly are aware,
by the support of our partners.
                                                          Africa represents one of the single largest regions
    Malawi will continue to need global support in        within the United Nations, and a very significant
the short and medium terms. We need this support          proportion of issues discussed in the Security Council
to protect the rural poor from food shortages caused      concern the African continent. It is for those reasons,
by prolonged dry spells in some parts of the country.     therefore, that Malawi joins the rest of the African
Malawi is looking for partnerships to build its energy    nations in demanding at least two seats in the permanent
capacity. Malawi needs support to attract private         category and five seats in the non-permanent category,
investment for the rich potential we have in agro-        as stipulated in the Ezulwini Consensus. Africa has to
processing and mining, among others. We are looking       lead its own development, and that will be a step in
for partnerships to support the development of our        ensuring that it can.
transport and communications infrastructure in order
                                                              At this moment, I say to the Assembly that Malawi
to improve access to markets.
                                                          is on a journey – a journey to change its trajectory; a
    Before I conclude I wish to draw the Assembly’s       journey to make real change happen; a journey to foster
attention to the following three issues that have a       private-sector growth; a journey to be an integral part
bearing on most of the least developed countries.         of the global community. Malawi is ready to take its
First, I call upon the General Assembly to ensure that    turn to grow, not just in wealth, but in opportunities,
the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of Action,         hopes and freedoms for all of the Malawian people.
adopted in Turkey in May 2011, will be implemented        As a new President and a new member of the global
in their entirety in an effective and timely manner.      community of leaders, I ask for the Assembly’s support
In particular, duty-free and quota-free market access     as this one African country journeys to realize its full
and supply-side capacity must be ensured to the least     potential — for its people, for Africa and for the world.
developed countries.
                                                              The Acting President: On behalf of the General
    Secondly, most least developed countries are facing   Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic
the adverse effects of climate change, which is causing   of Malawi for the statement she has just made.
flooding, land degradation and drought. In that regard,
                                                              Mrs. Joyce Hilda Mtila Banda, President of the
Malawi welcomes the recent outcome of the United
                                                              Republic of Malawi, was escorted from the General
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development held
                                                              Assembly Hall.
in Brazil, where international consensus emerged
and agreement was reached on important areas of               The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.
18                                                                                                         12-52207

