  

You can read daily news of Global New Light of Myanmar using mobile applications. Download now! (https: //www.globalnewlightofmyanmar.com/download/)

every morning!

Hotline:

We need to decide how we want Myanmar to appear in the
future and work together towards that goal, President says Main
Results of 2014 Myanmar Population and Housing Census
released

 

 

(/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/DSC_8188-copy.jpg)

President U Thein Sein addresses launching ceremony of the main results of the 2014 population and housing
census.

 

President U Thein Sein delivered an address at the launching ceremony of the main results of the 2014 population and housing
census at Myanmar International Convention Centre-ll, here, Friday.

On the occasion, the President said: Our Government made a decision in May 2011, just three months after the assumption of the
office, to conduct a nationwide census that Myanmar has not been able to undertake for more than 30 years. | approached Mr.
Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations Secretary-General, for technical support and mobilization of resources to conduct a nationwide
census that would not only be in line with international standards but also meet our national needs. The United Nations

SENS CHT MYANMAR \

 

Get The Global New
Light of Myanmar

delivered to your door

every morning!

in
Population Fund (UNFPA) and our development partners heeded our call and made it possible for undertaking the 2014 Census.
We managed to conduct census in areas of our country where census has never been done before.

The four-year long undertaking has been implemented in four phases - the preparatory phase; the data collection phase; the
data processing phase; and lastly, the data analysis and dissemination phase. We released the Provisional Results in August 2014
in line with international standards and practices. In keeping with prior commitments, we are launching today the detailed Main
Results of the 2014 Census.

Let me apprise you of the benefits and advantages that Myanmar now has due to the detailed nationwide census data.

As you all know, just as it is important for a country to have geographical territory, equally important are the size, distribution
and characteristics of its population. The census information will enable us to take evidence-based decisions made on the basis
of credible data, both at national and state/regional levels. We will then be able to devise and implement more appropriate and
effective policies where no one will be left behind. Every citizen, irrespective of gender, race, status, or disabilities, will have equal
access to education, health care and social services. On the other hand, the census information will provide us with an accurate
data on potential national human resources that we can utilize in national development tasks.

Since we now know the actual data of the people who are residing in the country, we no longer need to rely on estimation. We
can now devise necessary projects and plans and implement them accordingly and effectively. The information released today is
invaluable not only for the Government but also for the private sector, ethnic national leaders, political leaders, members of
parliament, development partners, civil society organizations and for all who are providing public services.

Taking this opportunity, let me link this nationwide census and the reform process that my Government has been undertaking
with all efforts and strength. The political, economic and social reforms are directly or indirectly linked with the census results.
From a situation where for many years, we had to do with estimation due to inability to undertake even a basic census, we are
now in the position where we have accurate data to work out for meaningful results. This is a true value of the nationwide
census.

  

ms

ae me we “* ng: eee Pr Ms

  

Vice President Dr Sai Mauk Kham presents main results of 2014 population and housing census to
Mrs Janet E Jackson (L), UNFPA Director to Myanmar and British Ambassador Mr Andrew Patrick.

(/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Untitled-17.jpg)

Reliable and accurate census data will provide such information as available human resources, population-based market position
on which plans and _ projects can be devised for effective provisions public services, development of private sector, attract foreign
direct investment flows that would ensure economic development for the country.

In the social reform process, population information would enable effective provision of education, health care and development
of cultures of ethnic national races.

From the political dialogues that we will be conducting in the very near future to establish a Union based on federal principles,
we will certainly encounter issues of categorizing and recognizing the ethnic national races based on political agreement reached.
In this respect, census data would facilitate addressing the said issues. Also based on the outcomes of the political dialogues,
issues of citizenship will be determined by legislative and administrative means. | am of the view that the census information will
play a crucial role in shaping the future of our country and our society. Both my Government and | have placed great emphasis
on the nationwide census and worked hard for its successful conclusion as a matter of priority. We feel that we have made a
national achievement that we can be proud of.

There are reasons why | have just mentioned that the successful conclusion of nationwide census should be viewed as a national
achievement. Last year, during the launching of census publicity campaign | mentioned that census could not be undertaken by
one individual or by one organization, but requires combined efforts of an entire national brethrens. It is an enormous national
task that entails concerted efforts of all nationals in order to conclude in a timely manner. Today, we have not only
demonstrated to the world the combined unity and strength of Myanmar and its national races but also established a milestone
in the history of Myanmar.

| wish to extend the sincere appreciations of the Government of Myanmar to the donors, political parties, ethnic national leaders,
religious organizations and civil society organizations throughout the country for the support they have rendered to make this
task possible. My appreciation also goes to all the Myanmar people who welcomed the census enumerators to their homes and
communities and patiently answered their questions.

In addition, | fully appreciate the participation and cooperation rendered in the census process by ethnic national leaders,
specifically the ethnic armed groups accepting it as a matter of national duty.

My Government and | also extend our sincere gratitude to the United Nations and the UN Population Fund (UNFPA), donors,
namely Australia, Finland, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States of America,
for their support and generous contributions. Their financial, technical and logistical supports are vital for the success of our
census. | also acknowledge the work that has been done by a vast number of national and international consultants and our
national staff members from different ministries and organizations. Their efforts have made it possible for us to complete this
immense undertaking and release the main census results as planned.

Our special thanks also go to the members of International Technical Advisory Board (ITAB). They played an important advisory
role on the technical and quality assurance aspects of the census throughout the census process. They ensured and verified that
the census was conducted in line with international standards, which establish scientific criteria for transparency and reliability.
This removes any doubt on soundness of the process and trustworthiness of the results. We the people and the Government of
Myanmar will always remember your kind help and contribution to our census.

Today is the first step of the dissemination of census data - the activity, which will continue in the next couple of months. | wish
to emphasize that we cannot implement development without the participation of community leaders and the people. It must be
implemented with the combined efforts of the Government, the development partners and the people to achieve a complete
success. We have successfully acquired data from the areas, where we were unable to collect previously due to various reasons,
and have accurately estimated the population based on data collected during mapping and checking with more advanced
estimation techniques. The concerted effort exerted by leadership of various sectors can be considered as our country’s human
resource and human investment.

We will soon be conducting series of workshops to disseminate the results of the main census. We will also be sharing the
experiences and knowledge gained from those results. The knowledge is the best instrument that can facilitate changes where it
is needed and develop areas that have potentials.

The Ministry of Immigration and Population have made available the result of the census - in print, on internet, and on DVDs.
Simplified reports are also prepared for non-technical users. | wish to urge the media to further publicize the results of the census
and to educate people more on the census results. The Government wants the people to know that population information has
been made available to the general public accurately and transparently. Let us move forward by using the census data as
resources to improve the living conditions and livelihoods of our people and our prospects for the future.

Today, our census reflects the image of Myanmar. We need to decide how we want Myanmar to appear in the future and work
together towards that goal. Let each and every one of us play an active role in whatever part we have in the future of our
country.

Now, | have a pleasure and honour as the President of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar to officially release the Main Results
of the 2014 Myanmar Population and Housing Census and declare available to all users in the country and anywhere in the world.
UNSG?’s special adviser Mr Vijay Nambiar and the UNFPA Asia and Pacific Region Director extended greetings.

Patron of the Central Census Commission Vice President Dr Sai Mauk Kham presented main results of the 2014 population and
housing census to the chairman of Nay Pyi Taw Council for region and state chief ministers, the director of UNDP to Myanmar for
UN agencies, the British Ambassador for international donors and U Ngwe Then for civil society organizations.

Chairman of the commission Union Minister U Khin Yi explained population, household affairs, migration, education and
economic sectors, use of communication devices and disabilities matters.

The president cordially greeted the guests.

Comments

0 Comments Sort by Oldest

Facebook Comments Plugin

Copyright © 2014 by Global New Light Of Myanmar
