Speech by the President, Jan Peter Balkenende, to the European Parliament,
in Strasbourg on 21 July 2004

Mr/Madam President, Members of the European Parliament, Ladies and Gentlemen,

I have great pleasure in today presenting the Netherlands Presidency's 
priorities to
you, the directly elected representatives of Europe's citizens.

As Members of the European Parliament, you hold one of the finest and most
important offices of all in the European Union.  It is no accident that 
Parliament is the
institution placed first in the Treaty.  You watch over the quality of our 
community,
which     is above all a community based on shared values.  You have received a 
proud
mandate from Europe's citizens.  I wish you every success in carrying it out and
warmly congratulate you on your election.

I should particularly like to congratulate Mr Borrell on his election as 
President of the
European Parliament.  I also wish you every success in that important position.

Even though we play different roles within the European Union, we have much in
common.  The main thing, in my view, is a great sense of responsibility: for 
Europe,
for the substantive issues on which we want to make progress and, above all, 
towards
the people of Europe, for whom we are doing all this.

I should like to thank the Irish Presidency for the great job done.  Bertie 
Ahern and
his team have performed wonders.

Successful enlargement to bring in ten countries, agreement on a new European
Constitution and mutually agreed selection of a really top-class nominee as 
President
of         the new European Commission: these are resounding achievements.  In 
their


dealings with the European Parliament as well, the Irish have set an inspiring
example, which we should like to follow.

Allow me to say a few words about the European Council’s nomination of José
Manuel Barroso for the position of President of the European Commission. You 
will
be discussing this issue later on today and tomorrow. I see Barroso as a man of
dialogue, but also someone who does not shy away from taking a lead.

The Council believes that he is the man to take the Commission forward at this 
time.
Someone who, together with others, can help promote economic growth and
increased security. We therefore hope that the European Parliament will approve 
his
nomination tomorrow.

Ladies and Gentlemen, there is a fine open-air exhibition to be seen around my
offices in the centre of The Hague at present.  Young visual artists from 
European
Union countries have been asked to create a work inspired by Europe's striving 
for
peace and justice.  The event is entitled "Art the Great Communicator".

From my own office, I can see a number of the exhibits.  What image of Europe do
they present?

One work shows Europe as a maze.

Another shows it as a tower under construction.

A third shows it as a drowning man trying to pull himself out of the water.
These reflect many different ways of looking at Europe.

How do Europe's citizens see it?  Judging by the turnout at the recent 
elections, its
citizens do not see Europe as a masterpiece to enthuse about.  For the fifth 
time in


succession, fewer Europeans turned out to vote.  Some groups are swayed by 
mistrust
and doubts regarding European integration.  A critical view is taken of the 
European
project, both within and outside the European Parliament.

The Netherlands Presidency can fully understand that.

However, critical comment forms part of democracy.  It can serve to strengthen
democracy.  There is no reason to lapse into pessimism.  On the contrary, there 
is a
need  right now to show Europe's citizens that Europe belongs to them.  A work 
in
progress.  Not perfect.  Open to improvement.  Yet worthwhile and, as history
teaches     us, vital if we are to tackle problems which no country can resolve 
on its
own.

That makes the European Union worth actively contributing to.

The Netherlands Presidency wants to send out that message loud and clear, with 
both
heartfelt ambition and clear-headed realism.

Cooperation with you is of the utmost importance in this.  Whether you are among
those who see Europe as a maze or those who see it as a tower under 
construction,
you  all represent the views of Europe's citizens.  They are what it is all 
about.  We
should like, with you, to make tangible headway, recognised and appreciated by 
those
citizens.

I realise that the period ahead is for you a time when new developments have to
become bedded down.  The European Parliament's membership has been expanded to
732.  Parliament has been joined by 162 representatives from the ten new Member
States, who have to find their feet.  Political families are changing their 
make-up and
taking in new members.  It is pleasing to see that you are energetically 
getting down


to business and pressing ahead with Parliament's legislative work.

There are more new developments in store, too.  The new Constitution 
considerably
increases the European Parliament's influence over decision-making and the 
course of
events in the Union.  National parliaments are also to play an important part in
addressing the question of whether there is actually any need for European 
regulation
in specific cases.

This will make the Union more democratic.  Under the new Constitution, its 
citizens
will make themselves heard more loudly and more forcefully.  Even those who take
a critical view of European integration will be better placed under the new
Constitution.

National parliaments are already busy considering how to make use of the new
powers.  This is one of the major pluses under the new Treaty.  I am sure that 
your
Parliament will also now be giving considerable thought to preparing for the 
greater
role which you are going to play.

The Netherlands Presidency welcomes the extension of the European Parliament's
powers.  This is one of the major pluses under the new Treaty and thus also a 
strong
argument in domestic discussion of approval.  In a number of countries, 
approval will
arouse heated debate.  I hope that, in the process, facts will not lose out to
presentation.  The new Constitution will undeniably bring the Union closer to 
its
citizens          and that is surely something we are all particularly anxious 
to see.

At just such a time of new developments, it is important to remain on course and
ensure that we continue to make progress for Europe's citizens.  Without smooth
cooperation between the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission, 
that
will      not be possible.  The Netherlands Presidency is ready and willing to 
work


constructively with you and sincerely hopes that you are willing to work
constructively with us.

Like many in this chamber, the Presidency regrets the failure as yet to resolve 
the
long-running issue of Members' Statute.  With your support, the previous 
President
put in a lot of hard work, but without any result so far.  If there is any 
prospect of a
solution, the Netherlands Presidency will certainly assist in arriving at one.

It is not possible, within the space of this presentation, to cover all of the 
substantive
issues on the agenda.  I shall therefore merely deal with those subjects 
particularly in
need of our mutual attention.  Without wishing to tread on subsequent 
Presidencies'
toes, we clearly have to venture to look beyond 1 January 2005.  We are all too 
aware
that it will take a number of years for objectives to be achieved.  The 
Netherlands
Presidency is only one link in the chain.  That is why we are trying to create 
the best
possible conditions for the work of future Presidencies.  The Netherlands 
Presidency
will constantly endeavour not to lose sight of longer-term interests.  If there 
is one
thing we want to bring to the Union, it is our forward-looking approach.

Internally, by working for consolidation of the enlarged Union, for sustainable
economic growth, for security and for a sound financial foundation for the years
ahead.

Externally, by looking ahead, together with our partners elsewhere in the 
world, and
by operating more decisively, as a Union, on the world stage.


Firstly, consolidation of the Union.  The ten countries which joined on 1 May 
2004
need to be able to feel completely at ease within the Union as quickly as 
possible.

The Presidency has a particular responsibility in this.  We shall do our level 
best to
ensure that the new Member States can fully participate in all of the Union's
proceedings as soon as possible.

At the same time, we want to pave the way thoroughly for future enlargements.
Membership negotiations with Bulgaria were completed a short while ago.  Those
with Romania have reached a very advanced stage.  Membership negotiations with
Croatia are to begin next year.

In December, too, the European Council is to consider whether Turkey fulfils the
Copenhagen political criteria for human rights and democracy.  If so, membership
negotiations will be opened with Turkey as well.

The decision must be arrived at honestly, under the ground rules to which we
previously, in 2002, firmly committed ourselves.  That means strict application 
of the
criteria laid down, but without inventing any new criteria.

We must not allow ourselves to be guided by fear, e.g. of Islam.  Raising 
barriers to
any particular religion does not fit in with Europe's shared values.  Our 
opposition
should be directed not against religions but against people and groups misusing 
their
religion to get their way by force.  Islam is not the problem.  Muslims, 
Christians and
people of other beliefs can live together perfectly well.  The problem is not 
religion
but misuse of religion to sow hatred and intolerance and to repress women.

The decision concerning Turkey does nonetheless greatly concern and trouble many
people.  The Presidency wants to make possible a well-founded decision which 
gains
all-round endorsement and will also hold firm in future.


A forward-looking approach is also at the heart of the second item on the 
agenda:

sustainable economic growth.

After a period of stagnation, Europe's economy is gradually starting to pick up 
again.
However, recovery is slow and laborious as a result of the underlying 
weaknesses in
our economic structure.  Europe's economy has stiff joints and makes too little 
use of
its head.  This makes our competitors too quick and too smart for us.  Anyone 
who
looks objectively at the developments sees that Europe is losing ground, even in
periods of economic recovery.

We must avoid focusing on our own job, our own social safety net, our own 
pension.
We should turn our attention to the jobs, social safety net and pensions of our
children.

How strong will Europe be in several decades? Will it be a place where our 
children
and grandchildren can build a good life? Can we continue to put into practice 
our
values of solidarity and social justice?

Beware: these are things that cannot be taken for granted.  Look at the booming
economies of China and India.  Is Europe strong and flexible enough to hold its 
own
against that competition?

It is against this background that we must give top priority to the 
implementation of
the Lisbon strategy.  During the Netherlands Presidency preparations are being 
made
for its interim review. A working party chaired by Wim Kok is currently drawing 
up
a report on what we have achieved thus far and what remains to be done.  That 
report
will appear at the European Council on 5 November.


Europe is failing to grasp important opportunities.  We do not take advantage 
of what
our internal market offers.  In particular, the market for services is still 
subject to all
kinds of national restrictions.  And it is in this sector that most Europeans 
earn their
living!

This means that we do not sufficiently exploit the internal market's strength.  
If we
realise that 1,8 percent of the Europe's GDP and 2,5 million jobs depend on the
working of the internal market, we have every reason to strengthen that market 
and
expand it towards the services sector.  The Directive on services proposed by 
the
Commission is an important step in the right direction.  It goes without saying 
that
the swift approval of this legislation can give a significant boost to the 
European
economy.

The functioning of the internal market can also be improved by fewer and better
regulations. We must make the rules work for us instead of the other way round. 
 The
Irish, Netherlands, Luxembourg and United Kingdom Presidencies are working
together to make this a priority.

Many of the aspirations contained in the Lisbon agenda will have to be fleshed 
out in
the Member States.  Labour markets must become more flexible and social security
systems more enabling. Pensions systems must acquire a firmer basis so that 
future
generations can continue to build on them.

In the global economy of today and tomorrow, not only must Europe be flexible, 
it
must also use its know-how.  Europe's innovative capacity is not strong enough. 
 Let
us take one example.  Some 400 000 European scientists are currently working in 
the
United States.  They make up 40 percent of the America's scientific community.  
This
is  an enormous exodus of people whom we ourselves sorely need.  That is why we
must vigorously continue to improve the knowledge climate in Europe.  One 
concrete


measure is the setting up of a European Research Council geared to providing 
risk
capital for research.

Our aspirations are focused not only on economic growth, but also on 
sustainability.
The Netherlands Presidency will endeavour to strengthen the environmental
dimension of the Lisbon process, paying special attention to sustainable 
mobility,
clean technology and international climate policy.

The Union is more than an economic project.  Sixty years after D-Day, it 
remains a
project for freedom, solidarity and mutual respect.

Of the intangibles that particularly preoccupy people, security is the most 
important.
Greater security has always been a driving force behind European cooperation.  
At
one time we sought a precarious peace on a continent torn apart by war.  Now we
face new threats that compel us to act: terrorism and organised crime.  Threats 
that
we can only overcome together.

It is essential that together we continue to look ahead.  Now that the Tampere
programme is ending, new steps are necessary to extend the European Area of
freedom, security and justice further.  The Netherlands Presidency is 
endeavouring to
ensure that the European Council on 5 November outlines a vision that is as 
concrete
as possible.

In a free Europe with open internal borders, it is essential that we align our 
criminal-
law systems and that our cooperation is watertight.  Legally and 
geographically, the
Union must offer no place of refuge to criminals who abuse the freedom that 
Europe
offers them.

In so doing, we will at times have to walk the extra mile.  Sometimes countries 
are


strongly attached to their national traditions as regards police and justice.  
However,
without more extensive coordination in these areas, we continue to run the risk 
of
criminals evading the law and jeopardising our security.

Last month, the European Anti-Terrorism Coordinator, Gijs de Vries, outlined how
Europe can curb terrorism more effectively.  The Netherlands Presidency intends 
to
take active steps to elaborate and implement the proposed action points.

The Netherlands Presidency also attaches priority to a new European drugs 
strategy
for 2005-2012. This will focus on the joint approach to large-scale drug 
trafficking
and also on improved prevention and health care.

Tension sometimes exists between freedom and security.  Neither can ever be
absolute.  The important thing is always to strike the proper balance.

We must strike the same balance in the area of asylum and migration, which is
another part of the follow-up to Tampere that will be on the agenda at the 
European
Council on 5 November.

We do not wish to create a Fortress Europe, but we also witness the hectic 
movement
of asylum seekers and illegal immigrants entering and passing through.  
Facilitators
ruthlessly exploit this phenomenon.  Furthermore, we know from experience how
much         it takes in order to provide newcomers with full opportunities in 
our society.

Control of migration flows is therefore necessary, and we can only do that 
together.
In a Union with open internal borders we cannot  afford not to have a European
policy on asylum, immigration and repatriation.

We are entering a phase of further harmonisation, as provided for in the Tampere
programme. Our efforts are directed towards a common asylum system and improved


protection for refugees in regions of origin.  We must act together, on the 
basis of
solidarity between Member States, to combat illegal immigration.  This requires
effective surveillance of our external borders.  The Agency for the management 
of
external borders is vitally important for this purpose.  However, we must 
ensure that
it   can become operational in 2005.

Europe offers a place to anyone who is entitled to come.  By "place" I mean much
more than a roof over one's head.  A place means a place in our society.  We 
intend to
pay greater attention to the integration of newcomers.  In this area Member 
States
have their own traditions.  While there must be room for such traditions, we 
can also
learn from one another's experiences.

A credible asylum and immigration policy also entails the return of those who 
are not
entitled to stay here.  The Netherlands Presidency has the task of forging 
ahead with
repatriation policy before the end of the year.  This involves, inter alia, 
common
repatriation procedures and operations and the establishment of repatriation and
readmission agreements.

The last main item on our internal agenda that I wish to refer to is the 
financial basis
for future years.

Negotiations on the EU's future multiannual budgetary framework - the financial
perspectives - should be concluded in 2005.  This is a delicate matter, which is
viewed             in many different ways.  The Netherlands Presidency 
considers it its duty to
give those highly complex negotiations the best possible structure even before 
they
begin by agreeing this year on the guidelines and principles on which they 
should be
based.  This should increase their chances of success.

Of course, the European Parliament will be heavily involved in preparations for


establishing the new financial perspectives.

A Union which looks towards the future must also look outwards.  Our future is
closely linked to that of our neighbours and partners elsewhere in the world.

We are a Union of 25 developed countries.  A community built on the 
cornerstones of
freedom, solidarity and mutual respect.  And the world's largest economic bloc.

The world rightly expects great things of us.  Are we fully living up to those
expectations?  Europe could be more decisive.  We could achieve more by uniting
our      forces and speaking more in unison.

The major global issues of our time are combating terrorism, furthering human 
rights
and democracy, economic development and action against poverty.  In these areas
Europe must speak with a single, resonant voice.

The European Security Strategy, and in particular the broad vision on which it 
is
based, provides an excellent foundation for doing just that.  It is about more 
than just
expanding the EU's own capacities for crisis management.  The Netherlands
Presidency         is keen to use every possible means to work towards 
implementing the
Security Strategy.

The United Nations is at the heart of multilateral cooperation and must remain 
there.
As the President of the European Council, the Netherlands will play an active 
role in
discussions on reforming the United Nations.  Extra impetus also needs to be 
given to
the multilateral trade system.  Following the failure of the Cancun talks, we 
have an
opportunity this year to achieve real progress in the WTO.  Everyone will gain 
from
that.


Cooperation with our transatlantic partners, with whom we have such an enormous
amount in common, is also extremely important.  We must not forget that our 
values,
vision of peace and security and economic ambitions are largely identical.  The
transatlantic alliance is and will continue to be of special significance.

As a result of the most recent enlargement, the EU has gained not only new 
members,
but also new neighbours.  We feel closely associated with them and want to
strengthen our ties with them.  The same applies to countries in the "wider 
Middle
East"       and the Mediterranean.  The Netherlands Presidency is keen to work 
towards
increasing stability in that region and encouraging reforms in the political, 
economic
and sociocultural arenas.  The Barcelona process must be strengthened and
intensified.

The Netherlands Presidency will devote a great deal of time to the Middle East
peace process.  Europe must make a concerted contribution to the future of 
Iraq.  In
so doing, we will rely on the pivotal role of the UN and take account of the 
desires
and needs of the Iraqi government and people.

Our economic and political relations with Asia have become much more important 
in
recent years.  The Netherlands Presidency will continue to build on the 
strategic
relationship with our Asian partners at the proposed summits with China, India,
South Korea and ASEM.  We will also take that opportunity to look specifically 
at
the sensitive issue of human rights.


One in seven of the world's population suffers from chronic hunger.  In Africa 
in
particular, poverty, conflicts and epidemics are taking a heavy toll.  The 
European
Union will not abandon Africa to its fate.  The situation in Darfur, Sudan, 
comes
most readily to mind in that connection.  The EU must remain active there, not 
only
in terms of relief work but also in a political sense.  We are exerting 
pressure on the
Sudanese authorities to improve the situation, and will not hesitate to step up 
that
pressure if they fail to take sufficient action.

Apart from Darfur, the EU will continue to devote its energies to combating HIV 
and
AIDS and preventing conflict in Africa.

Ladies and gentlemen, every era is an era of transition.  The same applies to 
our term
of office as President of the European Council.

One of the features of our era - 2004 - is that the European Union is faced 
with a
paradox.

On the one hand, we have seen the dream of the founders of the European Union
fulfilled.  The countries of Europe have dared to throw in their lot together, 
and have
thereby brought about reconciliation, stability and prosperity.  Whichever way 
you
look   at it, that is a huge achievement.

On the other hand, however, it is becoming increasingly clear that such 
cooperation
and such a feeling of solidarity are no longer obvious to many people.  We seem 
to be
finding it more and more difficult to identify our common ground, as if we have 
lost
sight of what connects us at the deepest level.

This is something which cannot be ignored, especially now that the EU is working
intensively on its enlargement.  Before an edifice can be extended, it must be 
ensured


that its foundations remain solid, otherwise the entire structure and therefore 
all its
inhabitants are at risk.

In the light of this, the Netherlands has decided to take the initiative of 
organising a
debate on the importance of European values in 2004.  The fact that such values 
are
enshrined in the Constitution is not enough.  They must also live on in 
people's minds
and hearts.  Specifically, we will devote a number of meetings to that subject 
and
develop initiatives to stimulate discussion of European affairs with Europe's 
citizens.

In this way, we hope to make Europe's citizens more aware of what it means to be
European.  What makes Europe so valuable is that we are a community in which
freedom, respect and solidarity hold equal weight.  Are we sufficiently aware 
of the
importance of that fact?

The European Union is not perfect.  However, that is no reason to write it off 
or adopt
a casual attitude to it.  We should be afraid not of criticism, but of 
indifference.

Criticism is good.  Without it, there would be no improvement.  Indifference,
however, is not helpful.  Even worse, it undermines what has already been 
achieved.

The Netherlands Presidency wants to work constructively with you, the directly
elected representatives of the citizens of Europe.

Perhaps I can give the final word to just such a citizen.  A major newspaper in 
the
Netherlands is currently publishing a series of portraits of ordinary Europeans 
and
their visions of Europe.

One of the subjects is Ilma Kaulina, a 39-year-old graphic designer from Riga.  
Her
husband is a bus driver, and they have three children.


Ilma Kaulina does not regard Europe as a panacea.  Although she is critical of
Europe, she does expect certain things of it.

She says: "The European Union can give us a better life.  If you overlook the 
cultural
differences, you can see that together we have the prospect of a better social 
and
economic future.  All the obstacles will fade away in time. "

That is how I would sum up our approach.  Together with you, the Netherlands
Presidency will do everything in its power not to disappoint Ilma Kaulina from 
Riga.

Thank you.

