Speech
of
Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo
President of the Philippines
During the U.S. Congressional Reception and Awarding of the 2010 ICCF Teddy Roosevelt International Conservation Award
[Delivered in Washington DC, USA, April 13, 2010]
Thank you very much.
Congressman Tanner, Congressman Royce, other members of the U.S. Senate and U.S. Congress, Ms. Barbut, other NGO leaders, distinguished officers and advisers of the International Conservation Caucus Foundation, friends, ladies and gentlemen, good evening.
In behalf of the 85 million Filipino people who love our 7,100-island nation with tens of thousands of marine species and some of the most beautiful coral reefs and fishing grounds in the world, thank you for awarding me the Teddy Roosevelt International Conservation Award for 2010.
Named for the larger-than-life conservationist President Theodore Roosevelt, this award gives further inspiration to all my compatriots and those around the world who join me in doing all we can to conserve our precious natural resources.
Our country is truly blessed with an outstanding diversity of both terrestrial as well as marine species.
Societies and governments and the ICCF show these. Societies and governments around the world are increasingly recognizing the link between maintaining healthy ecosystems and providing food, clean water, clean air, a stable climate, and cultural and recreational services.
As a food source, wild stocks of fish are still the largest single source of animal protein for the world’s human population. In 2005, the value of fish production from the Philippine waters exceeded one billion dollars.
From an economic standpoint, the global tourism industry benefits significantly with nature-based tourism being the largest growing tourism segment.
As a natural defense system, healthy coral reefs and mangroves serve as safety barriers against storm surges and tsunamis, not to mention their importance as habitats and nurseries for thousands of species of fishes and invertebrates.
For basic survival, watersheds also provide clean water for domestic consumption, power generation and irrigation.
The ecosystems that surround us also hold undiscovered secrets that have the potential to offer unimaginable benefits.
Recently, I presented a Presidential Citation to Filipino scientist Dr. Baldomero Olivera who was awarded the Harvard Foundation Most Outstanding Scientist Award in 2007 in recognition of his contribution in the field of Marine Drug Discovery and Neuropharmacology.
Dr. Olivera and his team had discovered a compound now used as a painkiller which was extracted from a predatory cone shell called Conus magus. The compound is 1,000 times more potent than morphine minus the addictive properties; it is now being administered to bring relief to patients with chronic pain. It is awe-inspiring to imagine the other latent benefits stored in the tens of thousands of other marine species found in our marine ecosystems.
The bottom-line is this: we have a moral obligation to the next generation to protect the beauty and bounty of the land, air and sea for the rest of time. I am honored to represent the Philippines in this noble effort.
My first responsibility as president is to provide for our people, to lift up the poor, generate economic growth and leave the world in better shape for the next generation of Filipinos. Central to that mission is to harmonize economic growth with the full protection of our environment.
The trade-off between a clean, healthy and sustainable environment and strong economic growth is a false choice. We need both. That is precisely what I have undertaken during my tenure as president.
I take particular pride in our efforts in the Philippines and the region to build up and not tear down our ecosystem. We cannot eliminate poverty if the price of achieving that goal is polluted land, depleted seas and unbreathable air. Nowhere is our interconnectedness with the world more profound than the resources we all truly share. It is truly a global environment. We must all do our part to conserve it, grow it, sustain it.
Well, as you are now aware, because of this award, I am a strong advocate for the preservation and restoration of the Coral Triangle, considered the richest area of marine biodiversity in the world. Ms. Barbut liked it when I described the Coral Triangle as the Amazon of the underwater.
This remarkable area is the source of food for hundreds of millions of people across the globe. Therefore, strengthening the Coral Triangle is more than a task for the six nations that currently coordinate governance and management of the Coral Triangle Initiative. In addition to the Philippines, the governments also include Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, and Timor Leste.
In our last meeting in ASEAN, I proposed that Brunei also be a member of this Coral Triangle. We are united in our goal to protect this resource called the Coral Triangle. It is not only critical to the future of our nations, but also to the world.
If you have a tuna dinner or a tuna lunch or a tuna sandwich, chances are your food is coming from the Coral Triangle. It is precisely because of this that the world must step up and help. This is particularly so during times of economic hardship, when pressures are greatest to abandon our obligation to the environment or loosen the rules as we continue to address the issue of global warming.
As the world struggles to meet these challenges, we must take leadership — the ICCF here in the United States, we the leaders of the different nations — we must take leadership in showing the way toward a united front to find a common approach to keeping our biodiversity intact, our food resources strong, and our environment pristine.
In a developing nation such as ours, even if choosing between environment and the economy is a false choice. Still, many times in practice, making decisions that will ensure a healthy balance between development and conservation can be difficult.
I am proud to have laid down enabling policies and foundations under the Green Philippines Initiative that are helping to ensure healthy and productive ecosystems. These, which include landmark Biofuels and Renewable Energy Laws, the Climate Change Act, the Integrated Coastal Management and maybe 20 or 30 other measures which promote sustainable development of our coastal and marine environment and resources will become a legacy of my administration. They will benefit coming generations of Filipinos.
While we now have an enabling natural resource conservation policy environment, however, we continue to face the serious challenge of effectively implementing and enforcing these laws. To that end, we thank all our international partners: the UN, the World Bank, the GEF. The Asian Development Bank, and our US-based donors, many of whom are here tonight, among others, for providing the much needed development assistance for the Philippines and enabling us to implement many of our environment policies.
As we launch the International Year of Biodiversity, let us all recognize and embrace the fact that biodiversity is essential for maintaining healthy ecosystems which are in turn vital to our very own survival and the basic underpinning for poverty alleviation and human wellbeing.
Cooperation among nations need not be fraught with bureaucracy and take years to show results. Our work in the Coral Triangle is an example. It only started three years ago, but we have already put the region on the global conservation map. We’ve already enlisted the support of public-private-NGO partnerships that is a model for cooperation.
When three tragic earthquakes hit Chile just a few weeks ago, our new tsunami warning system prevented even more loss of life all across the Pacific precisely because we came together to solve a common problem. We can come together to the benefit of the world to sustain our fisheries, forests and landscapes.
There is no greater threat to our sustainability as a people and a world than nuclear weapons in the hands of terrorists or rogue nations. Anchoring my visit to Washington this week is my attendance at the Nuclear Security Summit along with leaders from 47 nations.
Let us ensure that these precious sources of power are always used for the peaceful generation of energy and maintaining peace between nations and are never used in violence.
Also, let us therefore work together to preserve this beautiful planet we share and leave it as a lasting and shining legacy for our children and our children’s children.
Once again, for this award, thank you.