Speech
of
Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo
President of the Philippines
During the ASEAN Business and Investment Summit
[Delivered at the Bali Hilton, Nusa Dua, Bali, Indonesia, October 7, 2003]
Thank you very Mr. Chairman Pesik.
Her Excellency Rini Sawandi, Ministry of Trade and Industry, my Cabinet escort for this trip; Mr. Tanri Abeng, Co-Chairman; participants of the first ASEAN Investment Summit, distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen.
I am here in ASEAN to seek for our people the blessings of economic and political security. All the region’s heads of state are gathered in Bali to sign the historic Bali Accord II, which will set our collective directions for the future. On the part of the Philippines, we will continue to muster regional consensus to fight poverty and secure our nation, our region from terrorism.
Pushing forward intra-ASEAN growth areas and ASEAN integration is indispensible to the main theme of our Bali Summit, which is “Towards an ASEAN Economic and Security Community.”
The forces of economic development and global security are becoming more and more tightly intertwined. Cancun was a wake up call for all nations to refocus on the start relationship between world poverty and world trade. I am certain this topic will continue to spill over into our ASEAN summit.
The collapse of the WTO trade talks in Mexico unravels the disparity in perception between first and third world countries on how international trade should be conducted. While the WTO promised much in helping bridge the economic divide through a liberalized trading environment, it has only managed to tarry so painfully on delivery.
The emergence of the group of 21 during the Cancun Summit is a development that the Philippines will continue to work with to press for agricultural reforms and the removal of first world subsidies to farm sectors. ASEAN should unite in support of this alliance to push for our collective interest in the WTO and ensure a just and fair global trading system.
These recent developments also underscore the need for greater cooperation among us to keep our vision of an integrated, prosperous and competitive ASEAN by 2020 on track.
I will not repeat the wise words that His Majesty, the Sultan of Brunei spoke earlier about the blessings of integration. I would just want to practically add in a practical sense that we should consider the outcome of the McKinsey competitiveness study which it did for the ASEAN, which identifies the weak links in our integration efforts, as well as measures to accelerate them. The McKinsey study has identified the priority sectors in fast-tracking our regional integration, beginning with consumer goods and electronics and the strengthening of ASEAN institutions and addressing our individual country concerns. We need to look into these priorities to promote regional complementation and make our region more globally competitive.
I understand that the business advisory council as well as the Asian Economic Ministers look at this study and added more areas for ASEAN integration. So that now we have ii areas ASEAN integration and the Philippines is honored to be chosen as the coordinator for the electronic sector which makes up 60 percent of our export.
The intra-regional growth areas like BIMP-EAGA and the greater of Mekong sub-region provide an appropriate environment to gain a relevant understanding of the dynamic developments in the region as a whole.
Sub-regional growth areas such as BIMP-EAGA and the greater Mekong sub-region are not merely building blocks of AFTA, they are essential elements to fully realize and sustain a genuine ASEAN economic integration.
Sub-regional growth areas do not weaken initiatives towards a single market. Rather, they complement and accelerate the realization of an ASEAN economic community and maximize their own full potential through integrative enhancement of capacities among neighboring provinces and states, and by enhancing the traditional trading relations in the growth area that have existed for centuries.
For instance in the BIMP-EAGA growth area, we are made up of the regions, the internal regions in our countries that share common seas. The common seas have been our trading roots for centuries and that is why it is natural for their to be even more accelerated trade and integration within the BIMP-EAGA provinces of our four countries.
At the business firm level, investments in sub-regional growth areas such as the BIMP-EAGA enable firms to gain a better understanding of the changing customer needs within the region. It is a fruitful route of entry for small and medium enterprises or SMEs, if they wish to gain particular signaling of customer needs. In fact within the BIMP-EAGA, it has been the SMEs that have been the most vigorous in the private sector.
Through BIMP-EAGA institutions such as the East ASEAN Business Council and the BIMP-facilitation center, more accurate and up-to-date information is within reach of investors. This enables businesses to craft responsive business plans and deploy resources more efficiently.
The Philippines has enthusiastically supported the BIMP-EAGA initiative since it was founded in 1994.
In the 1997 because of the Asian crisis the BIMP-EAGA momentum was hauled. And since I became president in 2001, we have sought to revive that momentum.
I am pleased that since the 11th BIMP-EAGA Senior Officials Meeting and 8th Ministerial Meetings which our country organized in Davao city last month, there has been a very strong indication of support by the stakeholders in the sub-region.
The meetings set the stage for BIMP-EAGA’s strengthening through confidence-building initiatives such as the opening of air and sea passenger and cargo services between Davao and Manado; between Zamboanga, Tawi-Tawi, Sabah and Sandakan; between Zamboanga, Tawi-Tawi, and Tawau, among others, and the consolidation of existing institutional mechanisms and processes.
To consolidate this mechanisms and processes in the BIMP-EAGA Summit later this afternoon, I shall proposed that the Asian Development Bank which is the BIMP-EAGA adviser should appoint a senior officials to take care BIMP-EAGA matters and push the envelope forward.
From a business standpoint, there are so many brilliant opportunities in BIMP-EAGA. To highlight a few — agro-industry, fisheries especially in the Southern Philippine seas, energy, tourism and we are here in Bali to dramatize that, telecommunications, air and sea linkages, retail, financial services, construction, among other areas.
BIMP-EAGA of course, is mindful of the perceived security issue in the area. And I would like to assure the ASEAN business community that this is being addressed vigorously.
The Philippines is currently prepared for the major port-to-port bilateral customs-immigration-quarantine-security meetings with Malaysia and Indonesia to address border crossings issues. We expect port-to-port arrangements to be concluded for Zamboanga and Sandakan, General Santos City and Bitung, and Davao and Manado. The accession of Brunei Darussalam to the agreement on information exchange and establishment of communication procedures which was initiated by the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia after the 9-11 completes the BIMP-EAGA look and is also a significant step forward.
Likewise, the Philippines will soon host the first BIMP-EAGA security officials’ conference to strengthen direct contacts among law enforcers within the sub-regional growth. Through all these and more, we shall forge a stronger collective push against terrorism and transnational crime.
As I said, the theme this summit is economic and security collectiveness. And this is the same not just for ASEAN but also especially BIMP-EAGA. This has a bearing on the imminent stint of the Philippines in the U.N. Security Council. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the nations of ASEAN and the nations of Asia for supporting our nomination to the un security council. There, I shall carry our common banner of collective security, multilateral peacekeeping and the rule of law. These principles are strong guarantees of an ASEAN economic and security community.
Our summit meeting also links up with our determined drive for peace and development in Mindanao which along with Palawan that portion of the Philippines that belongs to BIMP-EAGA. We have the full support of the UN Secretary General for this effort. I am grateful to Malaysia for facilitating the projected peace talks just as Indonesia facilitated our peace talks with the MNLF almost a decade ago.. The OIC countries are keenly awaiting developments, with growing commitments of aid and investments. The U.S. Institute for Peace has committed to put in concrete support for conflict-resolution.
We are also paving the way for the establishment of a multi-donor trust fund that will cut in once a new peace accord is forged. This was one of the major outputs for our region of World Bank meeting that was just recently held in Dubai. This multi-donor fund, the peace dividend for Mindanao will be led by the World Bank, with commitments from the Islamic Development Bank, the OPEC, USAID, and the governments of several OIC countries.
Yes, we will push the envelope on this effort as we unleash massive public resources and official development assistance for infrastructure, socioeconomic programs and autonomous capacity-building in southern Philippines, the part of the Philippines that belongs to BIMP-EAGA.
For the Philippines, I also wish to assure you of greater certainty to business and our investors. Our programs in the Philippines are devoted to strengthening the economy, creating more jobs, and encouraging business activity that is unhampered by corruption and red tape in government.
The business environment is ready for a good take-off in the Philippines, in the BIMP-EAGA and in ASEAN as a whole. We shall continue to move towards greater complimentarity as we shore up regional security. We shall win peace and development in the pockets of conflict as we shift the base of economic growth to the communities.
ASEAN has created and continues to offer opportunities for economic consolidation whether in ASEAN as a whole or in intra-ASEAN south regional groupings such as BIMP-EAGA. These opportunities are the key to regional stability and prosperity. I am confident that the vibrant ASEAN business community will reach for this opportunity.
Thank you.