Speech of Vojislav Kostunica
at the UN Security Council


New York, 3 April 2007

Mr President,
Distinguished representatives of the Security Council member-states,
Your Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

At the outset I wish to present my compliments to this august  body  of  the
World Organization. I believe that the distinguished representatives of  the
Security Council member states who are present  here  are  well  aware  that
Serbia is an old European state. It was a member of the  League  of  Nations
and later one of the founding  members  of  the  United  Nations.  With  its
centuries-old tradition of state building, Serbia has taken part in  shaping
the history of Europe and thus in contributing to the definition of  lasting
and universal values essential to the world that we  live  in.  When  saying
this, I refer first of all to fundamental values such  as  justice  and  the
rule of law.

I am certain that we all fully share the belief that  every  state  has  the
right, guaranteed by the UN Charter, to demand that it be protected  by  the
general principles of international law  and  elementary  justice.  To  this
date nobody has ever attempted to challenge the validity of the  fundamental
principle of respect  for  the  sovereignty  and  territorial  integrity  of
internationally  recognized  states,  or  to  question  the   principle   of
inviolability of their internationally recognized  borders.  I  stress  that
this has never happened before,  that  is  –  not  until  the  UN  Secretary
General’s Special Envoy Mr. Martti Ahtisaari presented his proposal  on  the
Kosovo status settlement. In this respect, your Excellencies, we are  indeed
confronted with a potentially very dangerous precedent.

Serbia has already clearly stated that Special  Envoy  Ahtisaari  in  effect
proposes to deprive Serbia of 15 percent of its territory. This is  contrary
to the  principles  of  international  law,  contrary  to  the  UN  Charter,
contrary to the UN SC Resolution 1244, contrary to the Helsinki  Final  Act,
contrary to the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia  and,  last  but  not
least,  contrary  to  elementary  justice.  His  proposal   envisages   that
internationally recognized borders of Serbia should be redrawn  against  its
will, by brutal imposition. The only  justification  offered  is  that  thus
Kosovo and Metohija Albanians,  a  national  minority  within  our  country,
could form another Albanian state on  Serbian  territory,  adjacent  to  the
already existing state of Albania. When a  nation  is  faced  with  such  an
attempt to trample upon  law  and  justice,  every  citizen  and  the  whole
country know and are united in the feeling that the dignity of  their  state
is profoundly undermined and its future called into question.

This, Mr. President, is the reason why  Serbia  has  unambiguously  rejected
Ahtisaari’s proposal as an unlawful and illegitimate  attempt  to  dismember
our state. It was not within the mandate of the  Special  Envoy  to  violate
the principle of  sovereignty  and  territorial  integrity  and  to  propose
redrawing Serbia’s internationally  recognized  borders.  In  fact,  the  UN
Secretary General had given Mr. Ahtisaari the mandate to act as  a  mediator
in the talks aimed at determining the future status of the Serbian  province
of Kosovo and Metohija. This is the  way  his  role  has  to  be  understood
within the UN framework: neither the  Secretary  General  nor  the  Security
Council could have given Mr. Ahtisaari the mandate to open the issue of  the
state status of Serbia, simply because this is not permitted  under  the  UN
Charter.

The Security Council is the right place to ask Mr. Ahtisaari – what  is  the
legal basis of his proposal to violate  the  principle  of  sovereignty  and
territorial integrity of internationally recognized states,  thus  depriving
Serbia, a UN member state, of a  significant  part  of  its  territory?  The
Special Envoy has so far been silent on this issue,  and  it  is  high  time
that he should repair this omission. Of course, we all know  that,  as  long
as the UN Charter remains in force, there simply cannot be any  legal  basis
for such a proposal. No explanation can turn a violation of  law  into  law,
nor can brute might become right in such a manner.

The real question is: why has Special Envoy Ahtisaari chosen to act  outside
the scope of his mandate and why he has failed to take up the  role  of  the
mediator in the talks that should have been pursued within the framework  of
SC Resolution 1244 and the UN Charter? Renouncing his role as mediator,  the
Special Envoy has decided to come forward with a one-sided proposal  of  his
own which completely disregards the position of Belgrade and  is  in  direct
violation of valid norms of international law.

The moment the Special Envoy decided to act contrary to the UN  Charter,  it
became clear that his aim  was  not  to  help  the  two  sides  to  reach  a
political  compromise  through  a  negotiated  settlement.  In   fact,   Mr.
Ahtisaari deliberately adopted the position of the Albanian  side  and  thus
produced a proposal that only meets the demands of the Kosovo  and  Metohija
Albanians. The best proof of this is the outright rejection of this plan  by
Serbia and its ready acceptance by the Albanians in the province.

From the very start of the status process, Mr.  President,  and  I  wish  to
emphasize this very strongly, Serbia  made  every  effort  to  convince  the
Special Envoy that the key to his success lay  in  carefully  observing  two
fundamental conditions. First, that the status talks must be pursued  within
the scope of  the  UN  Charter,  and  that  this  entails  respect  for  the
inviolability of internationally recognized  borders  and  respect  for  the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of existing states.  Second,  that  he
should be a mediator trying to find a political compromise  and  a  mutually
acceptable solution,  and  not  an  advocate  of  one  side  only,  in  this
particular  case  the  Kosovo  and  Metohija  Albanians.  In  spite  of  our
persistent reminders,  Mr.  Ahtisaari  has  clearly  disregarded  these  two
crucial conditions. In  fact,  his  proposal  directly  contravenes  the  UN
Charter, and this is why Serbia insists that  the  Security  Council  should
reject it as unlawful and illegitimate.

The lack of any legal  grounds  for  depriving  Serbia  of  a  part  of  its
territory  explains  why  Albanian  separatists  and  terrorists  have  been
increasingly resorting  to  threats  of  violence  unless  Kosovo  is  given
independence. In the name of my  country  I  ask  you  –  can  the  Security
Council afford to remain silent in the face  of  open  threats  of  violence
and, moreover, allow those threats to serve as  an  argument  in  favour  of
forming  a  new  state  on  the  territory  of  Serbia,  an  internationally
recognized state and a member of  the  UN.  Serbia  is  convinced  that  the
Security Council will authoritatively reject all  threats  of  violence  and
that this august body will clearly oppose the use  of  force  as  a  way  of
settling the Kosovo issue, just as it would do in the case  of  any  similar
problem elsewhere.

I take this opportunity, Mr President, to say once again clearly to all  the
Security Council member states that Serbia  is  fully  committed  to  engage
constructively  and  responsibly  in  further  talks  aimed  at  reaching  a
compromise solution for the southern Serbian  province.  It  is  of  crucial
importance to recognize all the shortcomings in the negotiation  process  so
far and  to  ensure  that  a  new  international  mediator  concentrates  on
reaching  a  compromise  solution  that  should  respect   the   fundamental
principle of preserving sovereignty and territorial integrity of  the  state
of Serbia.

Serbia is fully convinced that it is possible to find such a negotiated  and
historically just solution. Serbs and  Albanians  have  lived  together  for
centuries, and for centuries Kosovo and Metohija has been a part of  Serbia.
Serbia is fully committed to enabling  the  Albanian  national  minority  to
achieve, in accordance with the SC Resolution 1244, substantial autonomy  in
the Province of Kosovo and Metohija. This means that the  Albanians  in  the
Province would be able  to  decide  upon  their  future,  manage  their  own
affairs and protect their interests, while at the same  time  Serbia  would,
in accordance with the UN Charter, preserve its sovereignty and  territorial
integrity. It is entirely possible to reconcile these two demands.  In  such
a case, it would be perfectly  acceptable  to  Serbia  to  have  the  United
Nations supervise the implementation of substantive autonomy of  Kosovo  and
Metohija within Serbia.

The justice of Serbia’s proposal may  best  be  seen  by  asking  whether  a
single national  minority  in  the  world  today  would  reject  substantive
autonomy defined in this way. I believe that we are  all  aware  that  if  a
negative precedent is once set, and if national  minorities  are  given  the
right to violate the UN Charter by dismembering existing states, this  would
mean that the Rubicon has been crossed. In  that  case  nobody  can  foresee
what  dangerous  consequences  for  global  peace  such  a  precedent  might
trigger.

This is why Serbia is convinced that negotiations must continue, with a  new
international mediator, and with the focus  on  finding  the  best  form  of
substantive autonomy for the Province. I repeat: Serbs  and  Albanians  have
lived together for centuries,  and  it  is  impermissible  to  conclude,  as
Albanian separatists are suggesting, that living together is  not  possible.
Genuinely   democratic   principles,   as   well   as   the   principle   of
multiethnicity, involve joint responsibilities for living together. In  this
distribution of responsibilities, the Albanian side would exercise  all  the
competences entailed by the mutually agreed substantive autonomy.  Countries
all over the world have  developed  a  variety  of  arrangements  to  ensure
autonomy for their national minorities, and it  is  impermissible  that,  in
only one  case,  a  single  minority  should  have  the  right  to  form  an
independent  state  and  reject  even  the  highest  form  of  autonomy   as
insufficient.

It is time to address the matter properly and to open direct  talks  between
Belgrade and Pristina. Regrettably, in spite of Belgrade’s insistence,  such
talks have not taken place so far. We have said several times  that,  before
submitting his  status  proposal,  Mr.  Ahtisaari  had  organized  only  one
meeting on the future status of Kosovo and Metohija. If we all agree on  the
complexity of the Kosovo problem, it surely follows that such an  issue  can
hardly be settled at  a  single  meeting.  Strong  commitment  to  continued
dialogue as the only way of reaching  a  mutually  acceptable  solution  and
settling the  future  status  of  the  province  is  necessary,  and  it  is
particularly important that all parties abide  by  this  principle.  If  one
side does not want to reach a  solution  through  dialogue  but  resorts  to
threats of violence, clear mechanisms must be defined in  order  to  prevent
and punish such violence.

Mr President, your Excellencies,

Today  Serbia  is  proposing  that  further  negotiations  be  based  on   a
comprehensive discussion about  the  implementation  of  the  SC  Resolution
1244. This is the right moment to review objectively whether,  and  to  what
extent, the binding provisions of this  Resolution  have  been  implemented.
More  specifically,  Belgrade  welcomes  the  initiative  of   the   Russian
Federation that the Security  Council  appoint  a  fact-finding  mission  to
visit Serbia and establish the extent to which the standards defined by  the
Resolution 1244 have been fulfilled to  date.  To  start  with,  such  a  SC
mission could see for  itself  how  many  Serbs  expelled  since  1999  have
returned to the Province. It is common knowledge that since then  more  than
200 thousand Serbs have been forced to leave the Province. More than  40,000
Serbs have been expelled  just  from  the  capital  city  of  the  Province,
Priština, so that at present there are only around 100 Serbs  living  there.
Why cannot the expelled Serbs return to the capital city  of  the  Province?
Perhaps there could be a reason why return is not possible  to  some  highly
inaccessible areas. But the fact that expelled people cannot return  to  the
capital of the Province due to security concerns, and that they do not  feel
safe in other big towns such as Peć,  Prizren,  Uroševac  and  Đakovica,  is
clear evidence of the extent to which standards set by the  Resolution  1244
have remained unfulfilled.

Only days before this Security Council  session,  terrorists  again  shelled
the mediaeval Serbian monastery of Visoki Dečani, dating  to  the  mid  14th
century, and ranked by UNESCO  as  part  of  the  world  cultural  heritage.
During the last eight years,  the  terrorists  destroyed  over  150  Serbian
Orthodox churches and monasteries, many of which have been an  irreplaceable
part of both Serbian and European cultural heritage.

In view of all these facts, the next natural step is to take  stock  of  the
actual situation in terms of the implementation of the SC  Resolution  1244.
We are convinced that this is  the  best  way  to  launch  a  new  cycle  of
negotiations.  I  stress  in  particular  that  Resolution  1244  explicitly
reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of  Serbia  with  regard
to Kosovo and Metohija and – I quote – ‘calls for  substantive  autonomy  to
be secured for the Province’. This explains why  it  is  precisely  this  SC
Resolution that should be central to further talks on the future  status  of
the Province.

Serbia is taking this opportunity to  point  out  once  again  that  the  SC
Resolution 1244 is binding on the Governments of all UN  member  states.  No
state may violate this Resolution, or take  a  unilateral  position  on  the
future status of  the  Province.  Any  unilateral  recognition  of  Kosovo’s
independence would constitute flagrant and - I stress - double violation  of
UN norms. Both the UN Charter and Resolution 1244  would  be  violated,  and
any state that decides to act in such  an  unlawful  manner  would  directly
call into question the  authority  of  the  UN.  Serbia  would,  of  course,
unequivocally  reject  any  such  recognition  of  Kosovo   and   Metohija’s
independence as null and void, as it would  constitute  direct  interference
on the part of such states in the internal affairs of Serbia. In that  case,
Serbia would ask the Security Council to act  in  accordance  with  its  own
Resolution 1244, so as to protect and reaffirm the territorial integrity  of
Serbia, as well as  the  inviolability  of  its  internationally  recognized
borders.

Let me remind you that Serbia has adopted a new Constitution in November  of
2006. Everyone has to recognize the fact that, through  a  referendum,  over
half of the total number of the adult citizens of  Serbia  freely  expressed
their will, reasserting once again that the Province of Kosovo and  Metohija
is an integral part of Serbia’s territory as laid down by the  Constitution.
In addressing the issue of Serbia’s territorial  integrity,  this  sovereign
will of the people of Serbia must be fully  taken  into  account.  With  the
adoption of the new Constitution of Serbia, its international state  borders
have been unambiguously and explicitly confirmed.

Once again I want to emphasize that Serbia is an  old  European  state,  and
that it cannot permit that law and justice be trampled upon by depriving  it
of a part of its territory. The dignity of our country and  our  people  are
inseparably bound with Kosovo and Metohija – the  place  of  origin  of  our
state, of our  faith,  of  our  culture,  and  of  our  national  and  state
identity. For Serbia, this is a question of truth, a matter of  law  and  of
basic, elementary justice.

As any other sovereign state, Serbia can only  see  its  future  within  its
internationally recognized borders, and upon the entirety of its  territory.
You can rest assured that Serbian people will never permit its state  to  be
dismembered,  nor  could  it  ever  recognize  the  existence   of   another
independent state on its sovereign territory.

Mr President, I thank you for the opportunity to  present  the  position  of
Serbia, to  inform  the  Security  Council  that  Serbia  has  rejected  the
Ahtisaari proposal,  and  to  request  that  the  Security  Council  support
further negotiations, with a new international mediator,  this  time  taking
the UN SC Resolution 1244 as a clear  and  firm  framework  for  reaching  a
negotiated settlement.

Thank you for the attention with which you heard me out.
