STATEMENT BY H.E. MR.
ALEKSANDAR VUCIC, PRIME
MINISTER OF THE REPUBLIC OF
SERBIA, 22. SEPTEMBER 2016.
Tuesday, 27 September 2016
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
        It is a great honour for me to address you today on behalf of the Republic of Serbia.
First of all, I have to say that I am profoundly grateful to all of you who are present today this
afternoon with us here. I know that you are not very much excited with my speech, but at
least we need to hear from, to listen to, each other from time to time.
Excellencies,
        This General Debate is an opportunity to highlight numerous achievements of the
world Organization in the previous period. At the same time, it provides an opportunity for us
to jointly re-affirm our commitment to the principles and goals of the UN Charter, as well as
readiness to strengthen our collective decisiveness to engage actively and to do more on
promoting peace and security, sustainable development and human rights, in the interest of
humanity as a whole. The Republic of Serbia strongly supports the proposed theme for this
year’s general debate.
        My country firmly believes that productive multilateralism is not only necessary, by
also achievable if we all demonstrate readiness for joint engagement in the spirit of
cooperation, compromise and flexibility in realization of the strategic vision of the better
world for all of us. The political will is the first step in that direction, but it must be followed
by both concrete activities and measures. Our deep belief is that this is the only way forward
in the world of growing interdependence and complexity where common challenges require
common solutions. We believe that peace is the foundation for all our common endeavours in
fighting poverty, unemployment, organized crime, corruption, violence and all kinds of

extremism as we strive to build a better world based on universal respect for justice, rule of
law and human rights and freedoms that are applicable for everyone, without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion.
         Now, it looks to me that I sound very familiar and many people mention the same
things and I have an obligation to be as brief as possible and I will address you without
reading my official speech and you are going to get the copies of my official speech. I will
address you in a bit different way. And I am not going to use this teleprompter as many other
smarter guys did during this conference. I need to say that, coming from a relatively small
country in the Western Balkans from the heart of Europe and representing today a proud,
dignified and freedom-loving people, I am very proud to be here to have an opportunity to
say that. I am very proud to see people here in this great hall who want to hear even us from
small countries, coming from small nations, because there are no reasons to address our
public audience to gain some political points, to obtain some political points; we have, I think,
enough votes to represent in a very legitimate way our people. I want to say that we heard a
lot of great words from the representatives of big powers here in the General Assembly of the
United Nations, but what we did not hear even this time…we did not hear about real
solutions of some very important topics, of some very important issues. First of all, we did
not hear almost anything about comprehensive solutions of the migrant crisis that almost the
entire world is facing. And coming from a very small country from the Balkans I have to say
that we are waiting for a proposal that the big powers will make for all us. And we would
always agree with them and we would be ready to do our job together with them. Even
though my country is not a member State of the European Union, we are ready to participate
in that quota system, but actually nobody within the European Union accepted that system
and now we do not know what our policy is on that, because there are different policies
between different countries which share the same values, but we see completely different
solutions with no ideas how to overcome all the bumps on the road to the future. Also I have
to add that the migrant crisis is not finished, not finished at all; it is just the beginning of that
crisis and today Serbia is facing many more difficulties that it used to be a year ago. Today
we have more than 7 000 people within our borders, Bulgaria has the same number. Those
people can’t go anywhere else because all the others have already closed their borders. And I
have a question for all of you: Is there any common solution for us, is there anything we can
provide together or should we take some steps for ourselves and by ourselves? O.K. We’ll do
it, but we’ll always be ready to wait for those common comprehensive solutions from the
European Union, as well as from the United Nations. It’s not going to be stopped in few days,
few weeks or few months. I want to draw your attention to a number of other issues. You
know that we have faced many difficult issues in the last 25 years and if you analyze the last
100 year, I think that we did not skip a single war from the First Balkan War to the latest
wars of the 1990s. I hope that we’ll do that in the future, that we will be strong enough, have
enough strength to overcome all the disputes and do something better for our people and for
our economic development. To tell the truth, we recently succeeded in delivering in that field.
For the first time in our contemporary history, we have a surplus in our budget and, after
many crisis years, we have a growth rate of 3 per cent this year and we expect an even bigger
and better growth rate in the years to come. When I say that, of course, it’s not comparable
with some countries coming from Asia and Africa [that have bigger growth rates, as I was
told by] my friend, the Prime Minister of Mauritius, but it is still better than the average
growth rate in Europe. And we are very proud to say that today. But at the same time, why I
insisted on different issues: we are once again facing instability in the region which might put

in jeopardy almost every single accomplishment that we made so far. And I’ve been insisting
on that over the last two years and, to tell the truth, we got a lot of support from the UN, we
got a lot of support from all our friends, from the West, from the East, but still the situation in
the Western Balkans has not been improved and that’s why we do worry a lot and that’s why
I think that we need to invest even more, more effort, more time and more political will to
overcome all the difficulties and all the disputes and all the quarrels and clashes from the past.
I need to add that we are facing some of the most terrible insults coming out of some of our
neighbours. I am not going to say a single bad word about them, I am not going to reply to
them today. They said of my people and of my country that we are a handful of miserables, a
handful of poor miserables. Nobody said that about any single country, any single nation in
the world and our decision was not to respond to them. And we’ll keep on that track and we
won’t do that to anybody else, even though we’ll be insulted and offended again. Why did I
say that? I said that because I think that the Western Balkans needs peace and stability; it
needs a better understanding and real reconciliation in the future. Did we succeed in that in
the last 20-25 years? I dare to say no, not at all. Hatred is even bigger among the peoples of
some countries of the Western Balkans. But, anyway, we succeeded in preserving peace,
calmness and tranquility. And we’ll do our best to keep the pace and to insist on economic
development, on preserving and developing our political relations in a way different from
what it used to be. I have to add once again that we are very thankful to those countries, to
those nations, that were not on our side but on the side of international public law, that did
not support the unilaterally declared independence of our southern Province of Kosovo and
Metohija. We are profoundly grateful even to you, Member States, that were on the side of
the UN Charter. I have to add that we are persistent in keeping up the pace in our dialogue
and conversation with Kosovo Albanians, because we need to live together, we need to create
our common future and these are the talks facilitated by the European Union and we are very
committed and dedicated to carry on with these talks. And we will always be ready to inform
you about the results of this conversation and hope that the situation in Kosovo and Metohija
won’t be a source of instability in the future. That’s at least one good conclusion from my
speech today. There are several other issues, there are different dangers we are being faced
with, many things that can put in jeopardy our sustainable development in the future, there is
an ever greater number of terrorist cells in different countries in the Western Balkans and
together with the entire world we’ll be doing our best to fight that terrible evil and that’s why
we joined the anti-ISIS coalition and I am proud to say that we’ll always be on that better side
of the world, the side of the world that will keep peace, keep stability and the values that the
modern world has been fighting for. I want to add once again that as Serbia we’ll do our best
to protect our own national and State interests, just as we always do our best to listen to the
other small and relatively small countries, because we need to unite ourselves. Otherwise, I
am very much afraid that our voice won’t be heard in the future.
         Thanks a lot and I think that at least you should be satisfied that you can always, at
least in the last 3 to 4 years, you can always hear that Serbia is an anchor of stability and we
are proud to be a pillar of stability in the Western Balkans. That will remain the case in the
next 5, 10, 20 years and I hope that we’ll be able to create a better world, better cooperation,
particularly between us smaller countries of the world and we’ll do our best at least from our
side to listen to you, to see what we can do together.

       Thank you, Excellencies, once again. I was really honoured to have had a chance to
address you.

