Name of politician: Goh Chok Tong
Date of speech: 23 October 2004
Title of speech: SPEECH BY SECRETARY-GENERAL GOH CHOK TONG, AT THE PAP 50th ANNIVERSARY DINNER
Link: https://www.nas.gov.sg/archivesonline/data/pdfdoc/20041023_0001.pdf
Category: Campaign


SPEECH BY SECRETARY-GENERAL GOH CHOK TONG, AT THE PAP 50th ANNIVERSARY DINNER ON SATURDAY, 23 OCTOBER, 2004, AT SUNTEC INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION & EXHIBITION CENTRE


On behalf of the Party, I welcome all of you and thank you for attending our 50th-anniversary dinner. I am glad to see so many Old Guards here tonight, especially Old Guard leaders like Toh Chin Chye, Othman Wok and Ong Pang Boon. It would have been great if S Rajaratnam and Goh Keng Swee were here too. But age and ill health have caught up with them. We miss them but will not forget their contributions to the Party and our nation. We also remember in our hearts those old comrades - Ministers and Members of Parliament, cadres and branch activists, and ordinary members - who have departed.


 2 We can accommodate only about 1,500 people here because of space limitation. I, therefore, want to thank those who are not present for their service and loyalty to the Party. The total dedication and personal sacrifice of all our leaders and members - past and present - have contributed to the success and longevity of the PAP. 


3 We have every reason to celebrate. The Party is 50 years old but has not lost its youthful vigour. More importantly, it continues to have the support of the people. To maintain its popular rule, the Party must remain young, continue to connect directly with the people and retain their trust and confidence. If success gets into our heads, and we begin to lose touch with the people, that will be our downfall. This is why the PAP does not believe in owning an iconic building as its headquarters. And the PAP leaders do not plaster their faces all over Singapore - except during elections, of course! 


4 Lim Swee Say told me this story. A Communist Party of China official on a study tour to Singapore visited our Party HQ. He counted only 9 full time staff working there and asked where the rest were. Swee Say told him there were no others. He explained that the Party depended on party activists and worked closely with our grassroots volunteers in reaching out to the people. In typical Chinese fashion, the CPC official captured this neatly as “ Jc ^ nT JE ” - the achievement of the PAP is everywhere but the Party itself is nowhere to be seen. And may we stay this way forever - hardly visible but invincible; no Party bureaucracy but lots of dedicated activists and volunteers. 


5 Over the last 50 years, the world has changed beyond recognition. So has Singapore. So has the PAP but, fortunately, not beyond recognition. In the 50’s and early 60’s, young Party members went to picnics where they sang revolutionary songs and took part in folk dances. Last month, Young PAP went to Zouk where they rocked and jived to pop songs. But they still wore white. 


6 It is right that the Party changes with the times to reach out to a new generation. But in changing, we must retain our core values and beliefs, our “whiteness” so to speak - integrity, incorruptibility, fair play, justice, meritocracy and compassion. Our Party leaders may change. Our activities may reflect the times. But our values must remain constant. 


7 To mark our 50th anniversary, the Party has produced a coffee table pictorial book to capture the 50 defining events or “gold nuggets” of our history. This book is the work of the third generation leaders. A small committee, led by Khaw Boon Wan, researched the history, picked the key events and chose the eye-catching pictures and crisp quotes to go with them. My compliments to the team for producing such a handsome and meaningful book. 


8 To launch the book, Minister Mentor and I have autographed 10 copies in our capacities as former and present Secretary-General. This is a limited edition. 10 sponsors have contributed $50,000 for each copy. I thank them for their generosity. I also thank the Friends of the PAP and others who have contributed generously. 


9 Surplus funds from tonight’s function and the sale of the books will go to the PAP Community Foundation’s Head Start Fund. This is a programme to help young children between ages 4 and 10 from financially burdened families get a head start in life, by giving them a good grounding in education. Successful applicants receive $600 a year. Those with special needs like the hearing-impaired, autistic or Down Syndrome children, receive double the amount. To date, more than 500 students have benefited from the scheme, including 22 with special needs. 


10 We have seen two-generational leadership changes in the PAP. The manner in which we transfer power is unique. Recently, senior journalists from SPH hosted me to dinner. One of them said that he was a student of history and asserted that no leader gave up power voluntarily. History showed that leaders clung on to power and did not let 3 go voluntarily, he said. He then asked me pointedly whether I would have stepped down as Prime Minister this year if Mr Lee Kuan Yew were not around. I replied firmly, ‘yes’. He was sceptical. It was against human nature, he said. I explained that I would because Mr Lee had set the example. 


11 In the PAP, we have institutionalised a planned and orderly system of political succession. The old generation systematically identifies and prepares the next generation to take over. It steps aside when the successor generation is ready. This is the way to defy the march of time, retain the Party’s youthfulness and continue to appeal to the electorate. 


12 However, while we pass on power as individuals, we must retain it as a political party. The PAP is a positive force. It is a quiet national movement of people who believe in Singapore and are willing to contribute to make Singapore succeed. Without the PAP, the history of Singapore would be totally different. I do not see another group of men and women who can do a better job of looking after Singapore than the PAP. 


13 If the third generation can retain the roots and values of the Party, while it changes and adapts to new challenges, we can be sure that our people will entrust Singapore and their lives to the PAP easily for another 50 years. I have every confidence that our third generation will take Singapore to new heights. So tonight, as we mark our 50th anniversary, remember the past and honour our party activists, let us also celebrate the beginning of an exciting new chapter for the Party and Singapore.