SLOVAKIA
MILLENNIUM SUMMIT OF THE UNITED NATIONS
ADDRESS
OF
H.E. NM MIKULAS DZURINDA
PRIME MINISTER
OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
NEW YORK
7 SEPTEMBER 2000
Madam President, Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, Ladies and Gentlemen,
At the turn of the millennia, the human race is going through fundamental changes, within a global context, that are bound to have a significant impact on the future of humanity in the 21st century in all walks of life. Apart from triggering the process of democratization, the end of the Cold War and the demise of the bipolar world brought forth new opportunities for many countries to enhance their international cooperation and, in some cases, rapprochement. At the same time however, it raised new challenges for the current generation and, in some ways, for the very construction of multilateralism, based on the UN Charter.
The end of this century has been marked by an escalation of negative phenomena: intra-state conflicts accompanied by humanitarian crises of tragic dimensions; gross violations of human rights; globalization, which, apart from economic benefits, has brought a number of negative social impacts such as the widening gap between the rich and the poor; new threats to the environment; organized crime, drugs, diseases, illegal proliferation of weapons and the soaring number of refugees across the globe.
Face to face with these challenges, the UN has justified its mission. The Slovak Republic is convinced that the UN plays an irreplaceable role in tackling a whole range of global issues, the solution of which by individual member states on an individual or regional basis has proven to be practically impossible.
The Slovak Republic, like other member states of the UN, is aware of the necessity for the UN to undertake overall reform. And this necessity becomes particularly apparent in the fight of the recent conflicts in the Balkans or protracted conflicts in Africa, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo or Sierra Leone. In this context, I wish to emphasize that the UN's reform cannot be complete without reforming the Security Council, being the key body of the UN responsible for preserving international peace and security. The increase in the number of Security Council members, efficiency of its decision-making and transparency of its activities should foster the authority, representativeness, credibility and efficiency of the Security Council in the future.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Our planet is a home shared by all of mankind. That is why the efficient solution of global issues requires an active involvement of the civil society and private sector. In this sense, the Slovak Republic supports the initiative of the UN Secretary-General toward the private sector, expressed in his appeal for the adoption of the, Global Compact of Shared Values and Principles" in the area of human rights, labor and employment, and the environment.
Slovakia also supports the proposals put forward by the UN Secretary-General in the fields of social development, standard of living, health care and eradication of poverty.
            The attention of the international community must continue to focus on the agenda of disarmament, particularly on weapons of mass destruction. No less attention must be paid to conventional weapons. Certain categories of these weapons are oftentimes used as the means for waging armed conflicts within countries that pose an increasing threat to international and regional security and stability.
Illegal proliferation of small arms has become a marked phenomenon of recent years. Slovakia, therefore, supports the holding next year of a UN Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects, which should outline the specific steps to be taken in tackling this issue.
The experience of the Slovak Republic from its involvement in the UN peace-keeping missions bears witness to the potential on the part of the small and medium-sized countries to actively participate in ensuring peace and stability worldwide.
Standing on the threshold of the new century, the international community must focus its endeavors on ensuring full respect for international law and, in particular, human rights, whose violations have recently been grave and numerous. Hence, Slovakia fully supports the expedient constitution of an International Criminal Court and subscribes to the Secretary-General's appeal to put an end to the culture of impunity.
Global developments reiterate the universal validity of the need to respect human rights and personal freedoms of individuals as basic prerequisites to the freedom of nations, their dynamic social and economic development, and harmonious coexistence worldwide. The Slovak Republic is firmly determined to take an active part in defending and ensuring that respect.
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
The peace, security, prosperity and development of humanity in the upcoming century will test our ability to combine traditional concepts derived from the sovereignty of states as the basic elements of international law, with new principles that are based on the global respect for fundamental human rights and the accountability of individual states before the international community for their breaches. These new ideas and principles should spark debates among nations and, ultimately, result in a broad-based agreement within the international community, as was the case 55 years ago when the UN Charter was adopted.
This organization faces many challenges. Allow me to express my conviction that, with the process of internal reforms accomplished, the UN will be able to react to each and every one of these challenges with the utmost tact and efficiency.
Thank you very much for your attention.
