 6 JULY 2016
 INSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS
 STATEMENTS AND SPEECHES




Speech by Slovak Prime Minister Robert Fico in the
European Parliament

Dear Mr President of the European Parliament, Martin,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Please, let me begin with a simple statement. The European Union is an extraordinary and unique project. It has
brought peace, prosperity and security to a continent that has suﬀered from centuries of hatred and bloody wars
between European nations. It was born on the ruins of two brutal wars with tens of millions of lost lives. Please, let us
never forget it! The world has yet to witness a similar successful integration experiment. Everybody is envious of our
project and many are trying to imitate it, but to no avail. I am very happy that Slovakia can be part of it.

The European Union has brought many benefits to Slovakia – during the 12 years of our membership we have become
stronger economically, socially and geopolitically. It is a great honour for Slovakia that for the next six months – for the
very first time in its history – it can contribute to events in the Union and contribute to its progress more than ever
before.

It is vital to start a discussion on how to make the Union better and more eﬃcient for all of us. The EU is for its citizens
and must be built by its citizens. The outcome of the UK referendum proves this. One of Union's key members decided
to part company with it. Brexit does not only express the attitude of UK people, it is a reflection of the failure of the EU
to communicate understandably its tangible benefits to its citizens. This gives us a clear signal that the European
Union must be more open to criticism. It has to become more flexible, less bureaucratic and more perceptive to
diversity. The EU has to get rid of its characteristic elitism and its obscureness for ordinary people who perceive it as
distant and too far removed from their daily problems.

The current Presidency is not merely the first ever for Slovakia. It is the first ever Presidency that will have to face the
first breakaway of a Member State from the EU. That is one reason why we will take an active and responsible stand
when it comes to dealing with the future of EU-UK relations. This topic will dominate our Presidency. We want the
negotiations to be as constructive as possible and to maintain the equilibrium of all who are concerned by the UK
leaving the EU. It is not necessary to rush things, because the process requires a certain amount of time. However, we
should not delay it, otherwise it will lead to diﬀerent misinterpretations and an uneasiness that won't enhance the EU's
credibility. Moreover, people living in the UK and in the EU deserve to know what Brexit will mean for them in practice.

The road to political decision-taking in such a complex European area is, from the historical and cultural perspective,
not a straightforward one. Unfortunately, we have reached a phase when we need to overcome fear. Fear of our
citizens related to migration due to possible loss of cultural identity, fear of terrorism related to doubts on security and
fear of economic problems which might lead to the loss of jobs and the inability to take care of one's family in a
dignified manner. But we must also overcome our fear – which is the fear of political leaders who are afraid that they
won't be able to deal with the current crisis. And I guess that this is what our citizens fear the most. That is one reason
why they are quickly losing trust in the EU.

Fear is the worst motivating force since it can tend to activate centrifugal forces within the EU and thus contribute to
its fragmentation. It also tends to undermine its institutional core and our European values and ideals. Fear is also
reflected in the current rise in popularity of extremist and nationalist tendencies in Europe that oﬀer simple and
radical solutions.

Although we believe that Europe has been absorbed by the Europessimism, this is not entirely the truth. Surveys show
that citizens in the majority of the Member States feel positive about their EU membership. This means that they still
believe in the European project.
That is one reason why the EU, although it is not perfect, still has a meaning and, especially, it does not have an
alternative. However, it needs a new investment incentive, new job opportunities and, above all, new trust! This is
what citizens want. Therefore, it is our intention during the Presidency to focus on better use of financial instruments.
The EU budget for 2017 has to be flexible and balanced. It needs to reflect the EU priorities and respond to challenges
that we are facing or might be facing. As part of the mid-term review of the 2014-2020 Multiannual Financial
Framework, it is necessary to create the right conditions for investments to have greater added value. Building the
Capital Markets Union and completing the Economic and Monetary Union and the Banking Union may contribute to
restoring trust in the economic power of the EU.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Unity and solidarity are the prerequisites for meaningful functioning of the Union. Given the great variety of European
nations, we cannot rely on the mechanical administrative assessment of problems. None of the current and future
aspects of the crisis can be resolved by uncoordinated individual national measures. No Member State has enough
power to do this. We need a joint European approach and a visionary process.

That is why we cannot focus merely on crisis management, we also need to give our citizens a long-term vision of the
Union's functioning and set up.

The migration crisis proves this point as well. Although the opinions of individual Member States on migration policy
diﬀer, there are currently a large number of common constructive solutions that can move the agenda forward. Our
Presidency will focus on these solutions – on achieving long-term comprehensive solutions. Our main priorities are
protecting the EU's external borders, improving the security and functioning of the Schengen area and eradicating the
causes of migration. The European Border and Coast Guard should be 'born' during our Presidency. At the same time,
we have to work closely with third countries, particularly with countries of transit and origin. Besides, the migration
crisis is not a seasonal regional matter, but a generational global problem that requires a global solution. It is therefore
necessary for the EU to speak at the UN summit in September with a common and coordinated voice and speak very
strongly and clearly.

Of course, we cannot look only inwards, we must fix our eyes on the outside – on the global position of the EU. The
EU's global vision for the next period should be ensured by the new EU Global Strategy on Foreign and Security Policy.
The European Union must work towards turning our relations with our neighbours and remote allies into a pillar of the
Union's stability and prosperity. In terms of the Eastern Partnership, we must put the emphasis on reforms, the
implementation of Association Agreements and visa liberalisation. At the same time, we must enhance the resilience
of our neighbours when it comes to external threats. The unresolved crisis in Ukraine serves as a constant reminder of
this. In the southern region we must make eﬀorts to contribute to finding a diplomatic solution to long-term conflicts
and crises in the region. It is our experience that the enlargement policy is one of the most eﬀective tools of
transformation at hand. Traditionally, it leads to enhanced security and stability – both in the EU and in the
neighbouring countries. We aim to enhance the credibility of the process and thus mobilise support in the Member
States and candidate countries.

On top of that, it is necessary to continue the tradition of protecting the stability and prosperity of the Union by
means of strengthening trade links with the global partners. During our Presidency we aim to contribute, in
cooperation with the European Commission, to successful negotiations on Free Trade Agreements with the USA,
Canada and potentially other countries.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

We all agree that the European Union needs a new vision. A vision being based on the strengths of the Union and on
the elimination of its weaknesses. A vision the citizens of the European Union can identify with. A vision which
sensitively takes into account history and diversity as well as real possibilities and the capacities of each Member State.

Slovakia welcomes the fact that its initiative to organise an informal summit of Heads of State or Government of 27 EU
Member States to be held on 16 September 2016 in Bratislava has been accepted and broadly supported. The summit
will provide an excellent opportunity to discuss this vision. Current discussions indicate that expectations are high for
the summit, which will no doubt mark the culmination of the Slovak Presidency. Although we can define the topics the
leaders have to talk about, we cannot underestimate anything and we must use the next two months to prepare for
the summit thoroughly, so as to make sure that it’s not merely an improvised exercise and an end in itself. I want to
assure you that the summit to be held in Bratislava will be organised and prepared in cooperation with the European
institutions. At the same time, the Slovak Presidency hopes that the summit’s conclusions will provide a suﬃcient
counterweight to oﬀset extreme views on the EU’s functioning. We must honestly admit that there are opinions that
excessive criticism of our common European policies would only prove Eurosceptics and EU detractors right. Having
said that, it would be utterly counter-productive and literally deleterious for the European vision if the summit to be
held on 16 September 2016 in Bratislava were to be concluded with a statement that everything is fine, but people just
don't understand us. We know that this is not the case. Such a conclusion would only fuel more referendum
movements and fragmentation of the EU, leading to enormous consequences. On the other hand, we have to take a
critical stand when it comes to reflecting on the need for fundamental reforms, institutional changes, even a change
to the EU's founding treaties.

Slovakia has always been one of the greatest supporters of the EU project, although our confidence in the EU has also
diminished in the wake of the financial and economic crisis, migration crisis and other diﬃculties. Extremists and lay
anti-Europeans abuse this situation. Nevertheless, our confidence in the EU is still among the greatest of any Member
State and my government wants to strengthen it. Today's generation of people in their twenties, thirties and forties
take peace, a common market, free movement of goods, capital, services and persons in particular, for granted. The
fact that there is a public perception of some facets of the EU’s functioning that is not positive, and even negative,
whether this is merited or not, does not necessarily mean that we should renounce all institutions, rules and policies
based on common values which have led to these great historical achievements. In our first common response to the
wave of Euroscepticism we must try harder to explain the meaning, substance and real achievements of the European
integration project. We must quickly distinguish the Eurosceptic mythology symbolised by curvature of bananas from
the real problems related to functioning of our Union and the weaknesses or failures of our Union policies and
institutions. From this perspective, 27 EU Member States can view the course of campaign conducted in the UK before
the referendum as a kind of laboratory experiment. There we can find the myths, blatant lies and half-truths used by
opponents of the EU, but also arguments underlining the EU’s advantages, which we can translate into our specific
national realities. We can also use the UK’s campaign, however, to clarify real concerns and the insecurity felt by British
citizens who didn’t want to stay in the EU. We should agree that before the informal summit of the leaders of 27
Member States to be held in Bratislava we will make honest, truthful analyses which will tell us which arguments and
tools are used by those politicians who have bet on inciting anti-European moods, primitive nationalism and the
illusion that EU institutions and rules can be simply abolished, while we retain a free market, four freedoms, solidarity
and cooperation between our Member States, and in particular a guaranteed peace that we have enjoyed for 71
years.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

As a colleague of yours, MEP Phillipe Juvin, wrote in his essay recently, the ‘cement’ of Europe lies within its history. This
history determines our sense of belonging to a family, our sense of European identity. It was the driving force behind
Slovakia’s integration eﬀorts over a number of years. We wanted our common values, including human dignity,
security, prosperity, freedom, peace and democracy, to become a reality for us. The Union made that all happen. But
we must not live in the past. We’re changing, and so is the world around us.

Take, for example, the single market. The four freedoms of movement – the freedom of goods, people, services, and
capital – rank among the greatest accomplishments of the European Union. For the single market to realise its full
potential, however, it needs to be a reflection of the reality in which we live. With that in mind, if we are to keep pace
with the accelerating digitalisation of life, we need a digital single market. The trend towards the use of digital
platforms and e-commerce services produces new opportunities and risks. It is incumbent on us to ensure freedom of
movement for EU citizens in the digital environment and the free use of its benefits without users having to worry
about their data.

If we are to keep up with the times, we need to aim at ensuring aﬀordable supplies of sustainable, clean energy. This is
where an Energy Union is called for. At its core is a diversification of sources, suppliers and transit routes.

The Energy Union is not all that is needed, however. We need to bring new energy to the European Union as such. The
European Union of the 21st century is in need of a wind of change. It needs openness, honesty and simplicity. And
responsibility in actions and thoughts.

Therefore, our Presidency aims to launch a profound reflection on what the EU wants to – and must – oﬀer the
European public in future. We must be creative. Both in identifying problems and in suggesting solutions. We must
also be realistic and pragmatic.

First and foremost, therefore, we want to deal with a positive and beneficial agenda. And address both traditional and
new, attractive topics. We need to focus on what unites us; in other words, we need to focus on topics on which we
are able to reach agreement and send a positive impetus to the public. Over the six months of our Presidency, we will
do our utmost to prevent fragmentation of the Union. We will, therefore, come up with proposals for solutions that
are acceptable both for the Member States and for the European Union as a whole.

EU citizens will be at the heart of our Presidency’s agenda. We aim to ensure tangible results with actual eﬀects on
people’s daily lives. Only then can we regain the trust of citizens and fight against the growing populism, separatism
and nationalism. But we must also simplify our communication with them. The European Union is unique. The value
and benefits of EU membership are indisputable. I am all the more saddened by the fact that we’re o#en unable to
articulate to our citizens where the EU’s uniqueness lies … that we’re unable to explain that a stronger Europe isn’t in
the interest of Brussels, but in the interest of all of us.

And perhaps asking the following simple question on a daily basis would not go amiss – what is the place of EU citizens
in our activities and reflections and, especially, what tangible and positive outcomes would the activities and
reflections bring for them?! I believe it is now time to put an end to initiatives that have ordinary citizens shake their
heads, be it because they don’t understand the language of the initiatives or fail to see any sense or benefit in such
initiatives for themselves or their families. A#er all, how can they be expected to understand the language when, let’s
be honest here, we ourselves have a hard time finding our way in the European agenda and in EU jargon?

Let’s replace the impenetrable terms and the diﬃcult bureaucratic language with sincerity and spontaneity. And let’s
drop the mindless and o#en needless ideas and replace them with something tangible and of practical benefit.

We will begin to act this way during our Presidency. Please support and join us so that we rebuild our Union together
on new foundations. An even better Union for the nations of Europe.
