Tal
FN-toppmötet i New York 16 september 2005
Göran Persson, Statsminister
Göran Perssons avslutningstal som ordförande vid FN-toppmötet i New York, 16 september 2005
Excellencies,  Mr. Secretary-General,  Ladies and Gentlemen,
During the debate at this World Summit, we, the leaders  from around the world, have reaffirmed our strong  commitment to international cooperation as the tool for  meeting global challenges. Our commitment to the United  Nations and its Charter has been illustrated clearly by the fact that we have gathered here in such great numbers.
Tonight we have adopted the World Summit Outcome, a  document that takes decisive steps in strengthening the  United Nations and the collective security system. It also  reaffirms our commitment to achieving the Millennium Development Goals by the year 2015.
The Millennium Development Goals gives hope for a  better future. But the political message from our debate is clear - we need to redouble our efforts. Additional  resources must be mobilized and more forceful measures  taken. We owe that to the millions of men, women and  children that suffer from diseases that could be cured,  from conflicts that could be prevented, and from hunger  that could be stilled.
Negotiations on addressing future action on climate  change at the global level will continue with the objective of reducing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and stopping human interference with the climate system.
We urgently need to conclude a comprehensive convention and agree on a strategy to counter international terrorism, one of the most serious threats to international peace and security.
We have decided to establish a Peacebuilding Commission to help countries emerging from conflict to lay the necessary foundations for lasting peace and sustainable development.
We will create a Human Rights Council to promote respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. We have decided to double the regular budget resources to strengthen the High Commissioner for Human Rights and  to further mainstream human rights throughout the United  Nations system.
The prospect of weapons of mass destruction being used  again is terrifying. We cannot afford to let this happen.  Our failure to address the threat from these weapons at the Summit leaves us with a crucial task ahead. States need to stand by their commitments, whether they concern disarmament or non-proliferation. Most urgently, we need  to breathe new life into our multilateral regimes for  managing these weapons.
We have taken good decisions to strengthen the efficiency,  effectiveness and accountability of the United Nation  Secretariat. I have heard many voices calling for a Secretariat fit for the challenges of the 21st century. We  will follow with keen interest the implementation of the  measures spelled out in the Summit outcome.
Excellencies,
True political leadership is about both words and deeds.  Over the last few days we have heard the words. As President of this High Level Meeting, I very much appreciate what I have heard in this great hall.
On some issues, views have differed. On others, consensus  has been striking. That is not surprising. Neither is it a  problem. Instead, it shows that the United Nations is a  relevant, vibrant body for debate on the issues that concern all of us today. That is exactly the United Nations that we need, and want!
Later tonight this high-level meeting will close. But our  work is only just beginning. When the words have been  spoken, comes the time for deeds. The momentum that has  been created in this hall must be maintained for months  and years ahead.
I urge all political leaders to remain personally committed in order to ensure that the decisions we have taken tonight will be turned into reality. This summit should be seen as a starting point for the reform process. I can assure you of my own personal commitment, as well as that of Sweden and ambassador Jan Eliasson in his capacity as President of the General Assembly, to this cause.
Let us join forces in making the 60th anniversary of the  United Nation a year of change.  We owe it to our citizens.  We owe it to the coming generations.  We owe it to ourselves.
I thank you.