Name of politician: Ma Ying-jeou
Title of Speech: President Ma attends opening of conference for ROC diplomats
Date of Speech: 16/08/2011
Category: Ribbon-cutting speech


Chinese Title of the speech: 出席「中華民國100年駐外使節會議」開幕致詞
Time: 中華民國100年8月16日
Words: 6624


Body of the speech: 


今天很高興應邀參加建國一百年駐外使節會議的開幕式,這是暌違15年後,第一次舉辦全球駐外代表及大使的會議,讓大家有機會進一步暸解國內的發展,以精進各位對外的工作。
回顧過去這一百年,國家的外交工作真是歷盡艱辛,因為「外交是內政的延長」,國家所遭遇的困境,自然地反應在我們的對外工作上。這一百年來,我們能一步步地走出困境,否極泰來,在這個過程中,外交人員的付出非常多。隨著策略的調整和國力的提升,我們開始對這個世界產生正面的作用。在這裡,我非常希望和各位談談如何善用外交活路,提升國際形象,強化風險管理與精進為民服務。
首先我們對過去做一點回顧。政府遷臺之初,外交情勢非常險惡,有部分外交人員決定不回臺灣,在當時做外交工作,真的是不可能的任務。那時候臺灣銀行發出去的信用狀,有的外國銀行都不收,可見風雨飄搖之情狀。
經過多年的努力,60年代,許多非洲殖民地紛紛獨立,我們的外交關係,尤其是邦交國一度超過60個。可是隨著中國大陸努力想要進入聯合國,我們也遭遇極大的挑戰,每年9月聯合國召開大會,都是我們中華民國外交部的聯考,每一年都非常驚險。很不幸地,在民國60年10月25日,聯合國大會通過了第2758號決議,我們從此失去聯合國代表權。從1971年至1979年,包括美國在內,許多國家跟我們斷交,使得我們的外交關係步入了非常艱困的階段。
美國跟臺灣斷交是在1978年12月15日,當時我在美國念書,有一天我在哈佛國際法圖書館的門口,遇到我的指導教授DetlevVagts,他看到我就跑過來安慰我說:「英九我要告訴你,貴國是美國最承認的不承認的國家(themostrecognizedunrecognizedgovernment)。」就是在所有不承認的國家中,我們是最被承認的;換句話說,是受承認的比重最多的,這句話道盡了我們外交工作的艱辛和特殊。美國雖然與中共建交,承認中國大陸是代表中國的唯一合法政府,但是它並沒有承認臺灣屬於中共,這一點直到現在還是如此。
另一方面,許多國家與中共建交,也在其建交公報中表現出不同的態度,譬如1971年10月,加拿大與中共建交,它只是用「注意到」(note)中共對臺灣的主張。1972年日本與中共建交,用的是「瞭解與尊重」(understandandrespect)中共的立場。1979年,美國用的是「認知」(acknowledge),並沒有用「承認」。在與中共建交的國家中,許多國家都保留了與中華民國繼續往來的空間,這實際上就是國際形勢的真實面。中華民國在臺灣60多年,不但繼續發展,亦表現亮麗的成果,是一個不能忽略的事實。所以我們要思考怎麼在艱困的環境下尋求突破,以長治久安。
我就任總統後,提出「活路外交」的構想。「活路外交」的名稱,是在研究臺灣出路的時候,想到一個拉丁字modusvivendi而來,意思是「一個生存的模式」。所以我請教過很多外交先進,「活路外交」用英文來說,大家覺得應該要用「ViableDiplomacy」。Viable所代表的,一方面有visible的意思,另外也有sustainable的意思。企業界用的比較多,有「可行、可務實的」,乃至於「可獲利的」的意義。[ViableDiplomacy」到底可以為我們的外交帶來什麼前景?我認為最重要的就是改變雙方的遊戲規則,而這個遊戲規則一定要互利雙贏,才能得到雙方的接受,因此我們提出雙方不要在爭取對方邦交國的過程中相互惡鬥。
我們不是不與中共在國際上競爭,只是競爭的內容不再是爭取對方的邦交國,而是在其他普世價值方面與對方競爭,所以我提出中華民國的國際角色是要做一個「和平的締造者」。我們和中共相比,哪一個更能夠確保世界和平?同時我們也要做一個「人道援助的提供者」,思考在哪些方面,更能讓國際社會感覺到我們有愛心,而且願意幫助他們;同樣地,我們要做「文化交流的推動者」,展現臺灣60多年來發展出的「具有臺灣特色的中華文化」,讓外國的朋友真正感受到文化的力量。當然,我們也要透過新科技和商機的創造,讓國際友人瞭解我們的經濟實力。
最後,身為炎黃子孫,我們也要做「中華文化的領航者」,這實際上是軟實力的展現,也是開拓一個新藍海。我的做法就是把零和遊戲變成互利雙贏的遊戲。到現在為止,我並未與大陸談過「外交休兵」或「活路外交」,因為這不僅對大家有利,也可以促進良性循環。換句話說,過去是惡性的雙方鬥爭,「烽火外交」為了贏得勝利不計一切。西方有一句話:「Every thing is fair in love and war.」這句話就是說在戰場和情場上不擇手段,往往就會超越正常價值可以容許的程度。因此我們現在要改回來:推動「正派外交」,而不是「烽火外交」;推動「尊嚴外交」,而不是「支票簿外交」。外交官都受過良好的教育,而且知道如何維護國家利益,應該從事符合身分、合乎國家利益的工作,這是我再三期待的。
在過去從事公職的30多年中,我有很多機會到國外訪問,在座諸位也有很多是我在國外認識的,我常感受到各位的活力和熱情,但因為兩岸關係,無法得到發揮,非常可惜。所以3年前我在就職演說中提出「中華民國須在憲法的架構下,維持兩岸『不統、不獨、不武』的現狀,並在『九二共識、一中各表』的基礎上,推動兩岸關係的和平發展」。所謂「不統、不獨、不武」,簡單地說,就是在我任內不談統一、不搞臺獨、不用武力。我在今天的報紙看到前行政院長唐飛先生剛出版新書,他說:「目前不統、不獨、不武,無可取代。」事實上,多數人都有這樣的看法,而這也是絕大多數民眾支持的立場。
我們改善海峽兩岸的關係,使得兩岸出現60年來和平的曙光。我們現在和大陸一個禮拜有558次班機往返,兩岸人民的往來,一年將近600多萬人次,這是過去沒有的盛況。另外,2000年臺灣對大陸的貿易,包括香港在內,占了所有出口的24%。到我們接任後,2008年上升至40%左右,3年後的現在還是40%。比例差不多,但數量當然增加很多,因為我們分散市場,即使簽訂ECFA後,貿易額增加,但我們和東協、美國與歐盟的貿易也都增加了。這也是我們希望看到的,分散外銷市場就是我們追求的重要目標,我們把兩岸關係和國際關係變成一個良性循環,而不是惡性循環。
3年來我們的邦交國仍然維持23個,沒有增加,也沒有減少。我在總統就職典禮或國是訪問時,都明白地告訴他們:我們非常願意增加合作,希望維護良好的外交關係。他們想與中國大陸進行經貿活動,我們不反對,因為中國大陸已經成為世界第二大經濟體,當它成為中華民國第一大貿易夥伴時,不可能要我們的邦交國不和他們做生意,但必須和我們維持邦交。如此一來,邦交國既可以繼續和我們維持邦交與合作,也不妨礙他們與大陸做生意。相對來說,我們也為邦交國創造一個「雙贏」,而不是「零和」的環境,所以雖然邦交國沒有增加,但邦誼鞏固。更重要的是,我們與其他重要的無邦交國家,恢復了高層互信。國與國的互信,就像人與人的互信一樣重要,我們採取「零意外」和「低調」的態度與友邦國家發展關係,減少區域的負擔,也創造「雙贏」、「多贏」的局面。兩年前,美國一些學者來臺灣參加「臺灣關係法30週年紀念」,曾經擔任美國駐中共大使的WinstonLord便說,現在是北京、臺北及華府三邊關係60年來最好的時候,這對臺灣、中國大陸、美國以及整個亞太都是正面的發展。
去年是韓戰60週年,60年前韓戰爆發,幾十萬人死傷。60年後,朝鮮半島還是戰雲密布、烽火連天,前不久延坪島又遭到砲擊。而臺灣海峽則已經從殺戮戰場變成和平大道,我們不認為因此就沒有任何風險,所以仍強調我們要做到「防衛固守、有效嚇阻」,國軍的建軍備戰不會停止,但我們絕對不會挑釁,也不會和中共進行軍備競爭。我們向外採購武器,主要須符合三項條件:第一、汰舊換新,取代老舊的裝備;第二、是國內無法製造的武器;第三、基本上是防禦性的。事實上,美國的《臺灣關係法》也只允許美國政府出售防禦性的武器給中華民國。
整個大環境朝這個方向改變,不搞「烽火外交」,推動「正派外交」,也不從事「支票簿外交」,但我們對外提供援助仍是必要的。中華民國已經是一個新興的工業國家。過去,當日本、荷蘭這些國家的國民所得比我們少的時候,他們對外的援助就超過我們。按照「經濟合作與發展組織」(OECD)的標準,像我們這樣的國家,對外援助應該占國內生產毛額(GDP)的0.7%,但事實上,我們離這個目標還有相當大的距離。從1950年至1965年,我們接受了15年的美援,平均一年約1億美元,前後加起來15億元。當我們從這些外援計畫畢業之後,要思考如何回饋,所以我們對外援助是應該的。外交部國合會的做法是將技術及經驗與其他人分享,很能切合實際的需要,而且花費不多,促進雙邊關係,值得肯定。
我念大學時曾陪外賓參訪外交部,當時的外交部次長蔡維平先生做簡報,向外賓說明臺灣的外援工作。外賓問他,中華民國在非洲的外援工作為什麼做得這麼成功?他說,因為我們採用的是「中級科技」(intermediatetechnology),不是特別先進的技術,但適合當地發展。我們的農耕隊捲起袖子、脫了鞋子就下田耕作。例如我在索羅門群島看見一片綠油油的稻田,深受感動,好像臺灣!我們讓當地人深刻地覺得我們跟他們站在一起。我們在諾魯推動「360計畫」——3年之內,6種農產品(包括蔬菜、水果和雞蛋等)都零進口,對當地民眾的營養有所改善。這個計畫已經接近成功階段,未來我們希望推廣到其他地方。
另外一個例子是在非洲布吉納法索。這個國家是非洲大國,人口有1,500萬人,鄉村地區很多地方均電力不足,很多家庭晚上無電可用。駐外人員傳回消息,請勞委會的中區職訓中心結合廠商,發展太陽能發光二極體的LED燈。這種燈可以使用4.5小時;同時,因為太陽能電池的機器在學校,所以小朋友必須到學校充電,充好電回家,小孩子看書或媽媽做家事都可以用。重要的是,如果明天還要用電,就必須上學,這個計畫成功後,也受到歐盟的重視與借鏡。現在我們在日照充足的友邦國家開始全面推動,尤其希望把太平洋島國,人口不多、環境單純的國家變成低碳島。臺灣的高科技配合我們的愛心,傳播到整個發展中國家,這樣的力量才真正「受人尊敬、讓人感動」,這比我們花錢去買外交關係有用得多。
我們要逐步實踐外援三項原則,第一是目的要正當;第二是過程要合法;第三是執行要有效;因為這樣的努力,我們在國際間「得道多助」。譬如:歐洲議會通過13個決議支持我們;從1971年離開聯合國,在暌違了38年之後,2009年我們第一次參加「世界衛生大會」,已經參加了3次。我們也參加APEC,並連續3年由連前副總統代表,層級是歷來最高的。另外,我們加入《政府採購協定》(GPA),到現在為止,透過《政府採購協定》,臺灣的廠商已經爭取到超過8億美元的訂單,這些都是很重要的成果。
李登輝總統於2000年把政權交給陳水扁總統時,給我們免簽證或落地簽證的國家與地區有54個。陳水扁總統把政權交給我的時候,還是54個,沒有增加。但是到今天,給我們免簽證或落地簽證的國家與地區有117個,增加了63個,成長率是116%,這是大家努力得來,是國際社會對我們的國民素質所投出肯定的信任票。去年11月11日,歐盟通過臺灣申請歐盟免申根簽證案的決議,今年1月11日正式生效,這天正巧也是司法節。跟外交有什麼關係?民國32年1月11日,在華府的魏道明大使及在重慶的宋子文外交部長,分別與美國、英國同時簽訂平等新約,真正廢除了所有的不平等條約。當時美國羅斯福總統講過:「如果中國被打垮,被中國所牽制80%的日本陸軍及50%的日本空軍,就可以投入太平洋戰爭,那麼很快地澳洲就會淪陷,然後他們可以向中東進軍,在地中海與德國會師,把蘇聯完全邊緣化。」那時候他們感覺到中國在戰場上可以穩住情勢,並使日軍受到極大的牽制,所以他才願意說服英國一起放棄在華特權,因此1943年我們得以廢除不平等條約。68年後的今天,我們得到歐盟的免簽證待遇。各國國民旅行使用簽證是常態,而我們能得到免簽證的待遇,可以說是一種禮遇。我非常感動,今天與大家分享我的心情,也肯定各位所做的努力。
這幾十年來的努力,我們的經濟發展、文化發展及各方面,都讓世人刮目相看。去年,我們經濟成長10.72%,創24年來最高;國內的投資比前一年成長32.5%,創45年來新高;臺灣的經濟發展在全世界排名第四、亞洲排名第二,表現讓各國驚豔,也感覺到臺灣仍然是一個非常有活力的地方。
展望未來,我有幾點期許。第一、希望當「活路外交」為我們開創新的空間時,各位可以善用這個機會,發展全方位的對外關係。前兩年我呼籲大家幫臺灣的廠商尋找商機,如今我們有更多機會能展現文化的軟實力。最近,日本國會通過法案,排除故宮國寶到日本展覽的主要障礙,也就是避免不當的扣押,日本政府相當有誠意,很快就通過了。文化的力量是無與倫比的;同樣地,我們參加世界各國很多文化節或藝術節的表演,也讓當地觀眾深刻感覺到臺灣的魅力。
第二、提升國際的形象。我剛講的這類活動,能提升形象。另外,我們其實可以在教育方面發揮很大的力量,尤其是我們的大學數量很多,而且有相當的素質。近年來,由於少子化的結果,有些學校招生不足,但倒不是純粹為了解決招生的困難,而是剛好我們的鄰邦,東南亞國家的高中畢業生,只有三成能進大學,這對我們來講是很好的機會。實際上現在越南已經來了相當多學生在南部的大學就學,目前在臺灣就學的境外學生,已經有四、五萬人,我希望能繼續增加至13萬人左右。這不是好高騖遠,而是我們鄰近的日本、韓國、香港、中國大陸與新加坡,早已向國際人才招手,我們起步已晚,必須急起直追。主要的目的是要吸引好學生來臺,讓我們的學生不必出國,就能接觸不同文化和種族的學生,培養出「將心比心、設身處地」的世界觀。另外,如果是大陸的學生,早一點和我們的年輕人做朋友,讓兩岸和發展的種子有更穩固的基礎,對臺灣而言都是非常有利的。教育當然是良心事業,但也可以成為一個國家重要的產業。
再來,我希望強化風險管理。氣候變遷使得極端氣候經常出現,像去年海地發生前所未有的地震,20多萬人死傷,臺灣在第一時間派出救難隊到達現場,立刻展開救援,兩天後救出第一個人,與其他團隊合作也救出7個人。因為這樣的關係,我去宏都拉斯總統就職典禮之後,特別繞道往多明尼加,在那裡和海地總理Jean-nayBellerive見面,我們在多明尼加總統LeonelAntonioFernándezReyna的辦公室談了半個小時。後來,海地總理出來開記者會時說:「我真的沒有想到,這兩位總統談了半個小時,沒有一句話談到自己的國家,都在談我們海地。」他深受感動。雖然現在海地總理已經改選,但是臺灣的重建隊伍還在那裡,幫他們建永久屋,教他們養雞、種菜,也認養了許多孤兒,這些工作我們還會繼續下去。為什麼要做這些事?無論有無邦交,我們都提供援助,希望讓大家感覺到中華民國是國際社會中具有建設性的力量,讓這個世界因為中華民國的存在而變得更美好,這個價值使得很多人會在許多場合默默支持我們,這是我們國家安身立命很重要的力量。
發生「茉莉花革命」時,許多地方要撤僑,非常感謝駐約旦的代表,在埃及撤僑時,我們是最早撤離的,也非常安全地回到臺灣。我們應該隨時做好因應危機的準備。八八風災重創臺灣,最大的教訓,就是這種瞬間、大量發生的天災,根本不可能做好「救」的工作,但因為它是可以預測的,我們可以做好「防」的工作,所以必須提前做「防」的工作。過去我們要撤離敏感地區的居民非常困難,但自從八八風災發生後,後來的芭瑪颱風撤了7千8百多人,凡那比颱風撤了1萬6千多人,都相對比較順利,尤其是凡那比颱風,如果不撤,屏東的來義鄉一定又會有上百人傷亡。這些都說明,早一點準備,就多一點安全。因此我們提出「料敵從寬,禦敵從嚴」、「超前布署,預置兵力,隨時防救」及「防災重於救災,離災優於防災」的觀念,我們這兩年天災造成的損失就大量地減少。所以我剛建議楊進添部長,重建區在兩年的努力下,已展現出非常不同的風貌,鼓勵大家利用這次回來的時間去看看,看他們如何把新居變新家,再把新家變成新故鄉的過程。
最後,就是精進為民服務。有這麼多國家給臺灣免簽證待遇,我們出國的人數一定會大量增加,對駐外人員的壓力也會增加,挑戰也愈來愈大。前兩天,楊部長各訴我,外交部的預算從民國91年到現在,減少了12億元,101年的預算會減少30億元。我相信很多省下來的錢,本來可能是不該花的,因為我們堅持正派、堅持清廉,故減少了許多不必要的耗費,這其實是我們的外交工作該走的路。但是外交部工作量卻增加了,尤其在國外,對國人的照顧需要更周到。特別是我們上任後,與原來的紐西蘭、澳洲兩個國家有《打工度假協議》之外,又增加日本、韓國、加拿大和德國等國,反應都非常地好。德國本來是200個名額,結果一下就爆滿,再增加到700個。希望這些活動,能讓我們的年輕人更有國際觀,更能適應變動中的國際社會;也希望大家在這一方面繼續加強,讓許多人覺得「有外交部,真好!」才行。
這兩天外交部正在舉辦「百年傳承,走出活路」的外交特展,我去看過預展,覺得非常感動,希望各位同仁有機會可以去看看。同時不妨利用機會去看看臺灣的生命力,也就是南部的重建區。最後,祝各位在臺灣的這幾天順利、愉快,回去之後,能努力地善用活路,改善關係。祝福大家,謝謝各位。


来源：《馬英九總統100年言論選集》239-252
https://vdocuments.site/100-03.html


Official News report (in English)


https://english.president.gov.tw/NEWS/3716


President Ma Ying-jeou on the morning of August 16 attended the opening of a gathering of ROC diplomats stationed abroad who have been summoned back to Taiwan. He encouraged the diplomatic personnel to carry out work in four areas, namely implementing the policy of viable diplomacy, enhancing the nation's international image, strengthening risk management, and boosting services to the public. These efforts, the president said, will enable the world to sense the accomplishments and contributions of Taiwan.


The president remarked that this is the first such large-scale meeting organized by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for ROC diplomats stationed overseas in 15 years. The goal of bringing the diplomats back to Taiwan is to help them better understand the state of development on various fronts at home and to hone their abilities in carrying out their diplomatic efforts, he said. The president acknowledged that the ROC has faced considerable challenges in its diplomatic work over the past 100 years. However, thanks to the efforts of the diplomatic corps, policy adjustments by the government, and the increasing strength of the nation, the ROC has begun to generate a positive impact on the world, he said.


President Ma furthermore stated that the ROC at one point in the past maintained diplomatic relations with over 60 countries. However, the nation began to encounter enormous challenges when mainland China started its aggressive efforts to enter the United Nations (UN). The president noted that the ROC lost its seat at the UN after the passage of United Nations Resolution 2758 on October 25, 1971. From 1971 to 1979, he said, many countries, including the United States, severed formal diplomatic relations with the ROC, leading to an extremely difficult phase for the nation in its diplomatic relations with other countries.


But even though the United States and mainland China established diplomatic ties, Washington never recognized Taiwan as belonging to mainland China. Meanwhile, many other nations also entered into diplomatic relations with mainland China while taking a variety of stances with regard to Taiwan in their joint communiqués on the establishment of diplomatic relations. For instance, Canada "noted" mainland China's stance on Taiwan when it established ties with Beijing in 1971, while Japan stated in 1972 that it "understands and respects" mainland China's position. In 1979, the president said, the United States used the word "acknowledge" and not "recognize" with regard to mainland China's stance on Taiwan, which shows that while many nations have established formal ties with mainland China, a large number of these countries have maintained space to interact with the ROC. This is the true picture of the international situation, he said.


The president expressed his belief that the ROC over the past 60 years on Taiwan has continued to develop and has achieved outstanding accomplishments, which cannot be ignored. However, we must forge breakthroughs in an especially trying situation, he said, remarking that since his university days he has constantly thought about how to create a long-term path of stability for the ROC. The idea of "viable diplomacy," which he began to implement after taking office in May 2008, is the result of that long period of thought, he said. This policy seeks to forge mutual benefit for both sides and put to an end the contentious struggle and attempts by each side to lure away the diplomatic allies of the other. At the same time, this approach is also designed to promote virtuous competition in terms of global values. The president pointed to the outstanding performances of Taiwan's youth in international design and invention competitions as an example, saying that this soft power is impressing the world and generating respect for the ROC. Consequently, we should compete with the rest of the world, including mainland China, in things such as this, he said, emphasizing that this is the right path to take.


In turning his attention to the development of cross-strait relations, the president stressed that the ROC, under the framework of the Constitution, will seek to maintain the cross-strait status quo of "no unification, no independence, and no use of force." In addition, the promotion of peaceful development between the two sides will take place based on the "1992 Consensus" of "one China, respective interpretations." The president pointed out that former Premier Tang Fei (唐飛) wrote in a recent book that there is currently no substitute for the "no unification, no independence, and no use of force" policy. This is the belief of most peoples, and public opinion polls show that this stance is strongly supported by the public, he said. We absolutely cannot return to engaging in "scorched earth diplomacy," "checkbook diplomacy," or "dollar diplomacy," the president stated. Rather, the ROC must return to normal diplomacy, emphasizing its role as a peacemaker, provider of humanitarian aid, promoter of cultural ties, creator of new technologies and business opportunities, and a standard-bearer of Chinese culture. This is the environment in which we seek to forge competition, he said, adding that this is what will enable the world to see Taiwan's worth.


As to how Taiwan can exhibit even more compassion around the world, the president said that the ROC is a newly industrialized nation. According to standards set by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, foreign aid among countries in this category should constitute 0.7% of GDP. President Ma said that we still have quite a distance to go to reach that target and therefore how to effectively provide foreign assistance will continue to be a topic that we need to ponder. However, he opined that if Taiwan is able to bring technology and compassion to other developing nations, we are sure to win more respect from the people of the world.


Lastly, the president encouraged the diplomats stationed overseas to make sure that work in four areas is carried out successfully: 1) Implement viable diplomacy: The president said that viable diplomacy has created new space for us in the international community and that diplomats should take advantage by developing comprehensive relationships with countries around the world, expanding business opportunities for the ROC, and maximizing the cultural soft power of the ROC; 2) Enhance the nation's international image: The president stated that education is a profession that cannot be practiced with a reckless attitude, and it is an important industry for the ROC. He expressed his hope that a greater number of outstanding students from throughout the world can be attracted to study in Taiwan, thereby boosting the nation's image; 3) Strengthen risk management: President Ma noted that climate change is making extreme weather more and more common. Consequently, we must adopt contingency in advance so we are prepared to deal with earthquakes, tsunamis, and other natural disasters. This, he said, will reduce the loss of life and damage to property, and will also provide enormous assistance to the public of the ROC and our allies; 4) Boost services to the public: The president commented that the increased number of countries providing visa-free courtesies (or landing visas) to ROC nationals has led to an increase in the number of our people travelling overseas. He expressed his hope that our diplomats will make sure that related services are provided to the public as necessary.


President Ma stressed that the government's embrace of aboveboard and ethical diplomatic policies can help to considerably reduce the amount of money spent and put diplomatic work on the right path. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, he said, shoulders the responsibility of conducting diplomatic work and ensuring the interests of ROC citizens while overseas. The president called on all diplomats to continue carrying out the agenda so as to make the public aware of what the ministry is doing on their behalf.


Google Translation：


Today, I am very glad to be invited to the opening ceremony of the 100-year-old diplomatic envoy meeting. This is the first time to host a meeting of global representatives and ambassadors 15 years after the founding. External work.


Looking back on the past century, the country ’s diplomatic work has gone through arduous hardships because “diplomacy is an extension of the internal affairs”, and the plight of the country is naturally reflected in our foreign work. Over the past 100 years, we have been able to step out of the predicament step by step. In the process, the diplomats have paid a lot. With the adjustment of strategy and the enhancement of national strength, we have begun to have a positive effect on this world. Here, I very much hope to talk to you about how to make good use of diplomatic life, enhance the international image, strengthen risk management and improve service to the people.


First, let's review the past. At the beginning of the government's relocation to Taiwan, the diplomatic situation was very sinister. Some diplomats decided not to return to Taiwan, and doing diplomatic work at that time was really an impossible task. At that time, the letter of credit issued by the Taiwan Bank was not accepted by some foreign banks.


After many years of efforts, in the 1960s, many African colonies became independent, and our diplomatic relations, especially diplomatic ties, once exceeded 60. However, as mainland China strives to enter the United Nations, we also face great challenges. Each September the United Nations convenes a conference, which is a joint examination by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of China, and every year is very thrilling. Unfortunately, on October 25, 60, the General Assembly of the United Nations passed Resolution 2758, and we have since lost the representative of the United Nations. From 1971 to 1979, many countries, including the United States, broke off diplomatic relations with us, which caused our diplomatic relations to enter a very difficult stage.


The United States broke off diplomatic relations with Taiwan on December 15, 1978. At that time, I was studying in the United States. One day, I was at the gate of the Harvard International Law Library and met my instructor Detlev Vagts. When he saw me, he came to comfort me and said,” Yingjiu, I want to tell you that your country is the most recognized unrecognized country in the United States (the most recognized unrecognized government). That is, we are the most recognized among all the non-recognized countries; in other words, we have the most recognized proportion. This sentence has done all the hardships and specialities of our diplomatic work. Although the United States has established diplomatic relations with the Communist Party of China and recognizes that mainland China is the sole legal government representing China, it has not recognized that Taiwan belongs to the Communist Party of China. This is still the case until now.
On the other hand, many countries established diplomatic relations with the Communist Party of China, and also expressed different attitudes in their communiqués. For example, in October 1971, Canada established diplomatic relations with the Communist Party of China. It only "notes" the CCP's claims on Taiwan. In 1972, Japan established diplomatic relations with the Communist Party of China, using the "understand and respect" of the Communist Party of China. In 1979, the United States used "acknowledge" instead of "acknowledge". Many of the countries that have established diplomatic relations with the Chinese Communist Party have reserved space for continued exchanges with the Republic of China, which is actually the true face of the international situation. The fact that the Republic of China has been in Taiwan for more than 60 years has not only continued to develop, but also showed brilliant results. This is a fact that cannot be ignored. So we have to think about how to seek breakthroughs in a difficult environment in order to last long.


After taking office, I proposed the idea of ​​" Viable Diplomacy." The name " Viable Diplomacy " refers to the Latin word modusvivendi when studying the way out of Taiwan, which means "a mode of survival". So I have consulted a lot of advanced diplomacy. In English, "Living Diplomacy", you think you should use "Viable Diplomacy". Viable stands for visible on the one hand and sustainable on the other. There are many uses in the business world, which have the meaning of "feasible and practical" and even "profitable". What prospects can [Viable Diplomacy]  bring to our diplomacy? I think the most important thing is to change the rules of the game on both sides, and this game rule must be mutually beneficial and win-win in order to be accepted by both sides and we will stop fighting with each other.


We are not competing with the Chinese Communist Party internationally, but the content of competition is no longer to fight for each other's diplomatic relations, but to compete with each other in other universal values, so I propose that the Republic of China's international role is to be a” peace maker. " Compared with the Chinese Communist Party, which one is more able to ensure world peace? At the same time, we must also be a” humanitarian aid provider '' and think about the ways in which the international community can feel that we are caring and willing to help them. We need to be a "facilitator of cultural exchanges" and show the "Chinese culture with Taiwan characteristics" developed in Taiwan for more than 60 years, so that foreign friends can truly feel the power of culture. Of course, we also need to let international friends understand our economic strength through the creation of new technologies and business opportunities.


Finally, as the descendants of Yan and Huang, we must also be the "leaders of Chinese culture." This is actually a demonstration of soft power and a new blue ocean. My approach is to turn the zero-sum game into a mutually beneficial win-win game. So far, I haven't talked to the mainland about "diplomatic truce" or "viable diplomacy," because this is not only good for everyone, but it can also promote a virtuous circle. In other words, the past was a vicious two-party struggle, and the " scorched earth Diplomacy" can do anything to win. There is a saying in the West: "Everything is fair in love and war." This sentence means that if you use whatever means on the battlefield and love field, you will often exceed the allowable level of normal value. So we have to change back now: promote "decent diplomacy" instead of " scorched earth diplomacy"; promote "dignity diplomacy" instead of "checkbook diplomacy". Diplomats are well educated and know how to safeguard national interests and should engage in jobs that are consistent with national identity and national interests. This is what I have been looking forward to.
In the past more than 30 years in public office, I have had many opportunities to visit abroad, and many of you here have known me abroad. I often feel the vitality and enthusiasm of you, but because of cross-strait relations, it is impossible to make use of it. unfortunately. Therefore, in my inaugural speech three years ago, I proposed that “the Republic of China must maintain the status quo of “ unification, independence, and non-reliance '' across the Taiwan Straits within the framework of the 92 Constitution, promoting the peaceful development of cross-strait relations. " The so-called "no-unification, no-independence, and no-force" simply means that in my tenure, there is no talk about reunification, Taiwan independence, or force. I saw in the newspaper today that former executive dean Mr. Tang Fei just published a new book. He said, "At present, it is unorthodox, not independent, unarmed, and irreplaceable." In fact, most people have this view, and this is also extremely great be supported by the people. 


We have improved the relations between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits, so that the two sides of the Taiwan Straits have seen the dawn of peace for 60 years. We now have 558 flights to and from the mainland in one week. The people of the two sides of the strait have exchanged nearly 6 million people a year. This is a grand event not in the past. In addition, Taiwan's trade with the mainland, including Hong Kong, accounted for 24% of all exports in 2000. After we took over, it rose to about 40% in 2008, and it is still 40% three years later. The proportion is similar, but of course the number has increased a lot because we have dispersed the market. Even after the ECFA was signed, the trade volume has increased, but our trade with the ASEAN, the United States and the European Union has also increased. This is what we want to see. Decentralizing the export market is an important goal we pursue. We have turned cross-strait relations and international relations into a virtuous circle, not a vicious circle.


Over the past three years, our diplomatic relations have maintained 23, with no increase or decrease. During the inauguration of the president or during my country visit, I told them clearly: We are very willing to increase cooperation and hope to maintain good diplomatic relations. They want to conduct economic and trade activities with mainland China, and we have no objection, because mainland China has become the second largest economy in the world. When it becomes the largest trading partner of the Republic of China, it is impossible for our diplomatic relations to not do business with them. But we must maintain diplomatic relations with us. In this way, diplomatic countries can continue to maintain diplomatic relations and cooperation with us, and it will not prevent them from doing business with the mainland. Relatively speaking, we have also created a "win-win" rather than a "zero-sum" environment for the diplomatic ties, so although the diplomatic ties have not increased, the friendship has been consolidated. More importantly, we have restored high-level mutual trust with other important countries without diplomatic relations. Mutual trust between countries is just as important as mutual trust between people. We adopt a “zero accident '' and “low-key '' attitude to develop relations with the AIA countries, reduce regional burdens, and also create” win-win '' and” multi-win '' situation. Two years ago, some American scholars came to Taiwan to participate in the” 30th Anniversary of the Taiwan Relations Act. '' Winston Lord, who was the U.S. ambassador to the Chinese Communist Party, said that now is the best time in the trilateral relations between Beijing, Taipei and Washington for 60 years. Taiwan, mainland China, the United States, and the entire Asia Pacific are all positive developments.


Last year was the 60th anniversary of the Korean War. Hundreds of thousands of people were killed or injured when the Korean War broke out 60 years ago. Sixty years later, the Korean peninsula was still clouded with flames, and Yanping Island was shelled again not long ago. The Taiwan Strait has changed from the battlefield of killings to the avenue of peace. We do not believe that there is no risk, so we still emphasize that we must be” defensive and effective and deterrent. '' The establishment of the national army will not stop, but we absolutely He will not provoke or compete with the CCP for arms. When we purchase weapons, we must meet three conditions: first, we must replace old equipment with new ones; second, we cannot manufacture weapons domestically; and third, we are basically defensive. In fact, the United States' "Taiwan Relations Act" only allows the U.S. government to sell defensive weapons to the Republic of China.


The overall environment is changing in this direction. We will not engage in “bonfire diplomacy”, promote “decent diplomacy”, or engage in “checkbook diplomacy”, but we still need to provide assistance to the outside world. The Republic of China is already an emerging industrial country. In the past, when the national income of countries such as Japan and the Netherlands was less than ours, their foreign aid exceeded us. According to the standards of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), countries like ours, foreign aid should account for 0.7% of gross domestic product (GDP), but in fact, we are still quite far from this goal. From 1950 to 1965, we received US aid for 15 years, with an average of about 100 million U.S. dollars a year, and a total of 1.5 billion yuan. After graduating from these foreign aid programs, we need to think about how to give back, so we should be foreign aid. The practice of the State Council of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is to share technology and experience with others, which is very practical and cost-effective, and promotes bilateral relations. It is worthy of recognition.


When I was in college, I accompanied foreign guests to visit the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. At that time, Mr. Cai Weiping, the then Minister of Foreign Affairs, gave a briefing to explain to foreign guests Taiwan's foreign aid work. The foreign guest asked him why the Republic of China's foreign aid work in Africa has been so successful? He said that because we use "intermediate technology", which is not particularly advanced technology, but suitable for local development. Our farming team rolled up their sleeves, took off their shoes, and went to work in the fields. For example, I saw a green field of rice in the Solomon Islands. I was deeply touched, like Taiwan! We made the locals feel that we were standing with them. We promoted the "360 Plan" in Nowu. Within three years, all six agricultural products (including vegetables, fruits, and eggs) were imported zero, which improved the nutrition of the local people. This plan is nearing the stage of success, and we hope to extend it to other places in the future.


Another example is in Burkina Faso, Africa. This country is a large country in Africa with a population of 15 million people. In many rural areas, electricity is inadequate, and many households have no electricity at night. Residents from abroad reported that they would request the Central Vocational Training Center of the Labor Committee to develop LED lamps for solar light-emitting diodes in conjunction with manufacturers. This kind of lamp can be used for 4.5 hours; at the same time, because the solar battery machine is in school, children must go to school to recharge, charge the electricity to go home, children can read books or mother can do housework. It is important that if electricity is to be used tomorrow, it is necessary to go to school. After the success of this plan, it has also been valued and borrowed from the European Union. Now that we are fully promoting in the friendly countries with sufficient sunshine, we especially hope to turn Pacific island countries, countries with small populations and simple environments into low-carbon islands. Taiwan's high technology cooperates with our love and spreads throughout the developing countries. Such a force can really be "respected and moved", which is more useful than spending money on diplomatic relations.


We must gradually implement the three principles of foreign aid. The first is that the purpose is legitimate; the second is that the process is legal; the third is that the implementation must be effective; because of such efforts, we "get more help" in the world. For example, the European Parliament passed 13 resolutions in support of us; after leaving the United Nations in 1971, 38 years later, we participated in the World Health Assembly for the first time in 2009 and have participated in it three times. We have also participated in APEC and have been represented by the former Vice President for three consecutive years, the highest level ever. In addition, we joined the "Government Procurement Agreement" (GPA). So far, through the "Government Procurement Agreement", Taiwanese manufacturers have won over 800 million US dollars of orders, which are very important results.


When President Lee Teng-hui handed over power to President Chen Shui-bian in 2000, there were 54 countries and regions that granted us visa-free or entry visas. When President Chen Shui-bian handed over the regime to me, there were still 54, with no increase. But to this day, there are 117 countries and regions that grant us visa-free or entry visas, an increase of 63, and a growth rate of 116%. This is everyone's hard work, and it is the international community's affirmation of our national quality. Trust vote. On November 11 last year, the European Union passed a Taiwanese application for a EU visa exemption from the Schengen visa, which officially entered into force on January 11 this year, which also happens to be a judicial day. What does it have to do with diplomacy? On January 11, 1982, Ambassador Wei Daoming in Washington and Song Ziwen, Minister of Foreign Affairs in Chongqing, signed new equal treaties with the United States and Britain at the same time, and truly abolished all unequal treaties. At the time, President Roosevelt said:” If China is defeated and 80% of the Japanese Army and 50% of the Japanese Air Force are trapped by China, they can enter the Pacific War, and soon Australia will fall, and then they can advance to the Middle East. He met with Germany in the Mediterranean and completely marginalized the Soviet Union. "At that time, they felt that China could stabilize the situation on the battlefield and greatly restrain the Japanese army, so he was willing to persuade Britain to give up their privileges in China together, so 1943 We were able to repeal the inequality treaty in 1949. Today, 68 years later, we are granted visa-free treatment in the European Union. It is normal for nationals of all countries to use visas for travel, and we can get visa-free treatment, which can be said to be a courtesy. I am very touched, I share my feelings with you today, and I am sure that everyone has made efforts.


Over the past few decades, our economic development, cultural development, and other aspects have made the world look impressive. Last year, our economy grew 10.72%, the highest in 24 years; domestic investment grew 32.5% over the previous year, reaching a new high in 45 years; Taiwan's economic development ranked fourth in the world and Asia ranked second. I also feel that Taiwan is still a very dynamic place.


Looking forward, I have a few expectations. First, I hope that when "viable Diplomacy" opens up new space for us, you can make good use of this opportunity to develop all-round foreign relations. In the past two years, I appealed to everyone to help Taiwanese manufacturers find business opportunities. Now we have more opportunities to show the soft power of culture. Recently, the Japanese parliament passed a bill to remove the main obstacle to the National Palace Museum ’s exhibition in Japan, that is, to avoid improper seizures. The Japanese government was quite sincere and quickly passed. The power of culture is unparalleled; similarly, our participation in many cultural or art festivals in countries around the world has also made the local audience deeply feel the charm of Taiwan.


Second, enhance the international image. The kind of activities I just talked about can enhance the image. In addition, we can actually exert a great deal of strength in education, especially our university has a large number and has considerable quality. In recent years, due to the declining birthrate, some schools have insufficient enrollment, but it is not purely to solve the difficulty of admissions, but just happens to be our neighbor. Only 30% of high school graduates in Southeast Asian countries can enter university. Great opportunity. In fact, quite a lot of students have come to Vietnam to study in universities in the south. There are already 40,000 or 50,000 overseas students studying in Taiwan. I hope to continue to increase to about 130,000. This is not a long way to go, but our neighbor Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Mainland China and Singapore. We have already begun to recruit international talents. We have started late and must catch up. The main purpose is to attract good students to Taiwan, so that our students can reach students of different cultures and races without going abroad, and cultivate a world view of "putting heart to heart and being in a place". In addition, if it is a student from the mainland, it would be very beneficial for Taiwan to make friends with our young people earlier, so that the seeds of cross-strait development can be more firmly established. Education is of course a cause of conscience, but it can also become an important industry in a country.


In addition, I hope to strengthen risk management. Climate change makes extreme climates often appear.Like the unprecedented earthquake in Haiti last year, more than 200,000 people were injured and injured.Taiwan sent rescue teams to the scene as soon as possible, and immediately launched rescue.The first person was rescued two days later, and cooperation with other teams also rescued. 7 people. Because of this relationship, I went to Dominican Republic after the inauguration of the President of Honduras, where I met with Haitian Prime Minister Jean-nay Bellerive, and we talked for half an hour in the office of President Leonel Antonio Fernández Reyna. Later, when the Prime Minister of Haiti came out to hold a press conference, he said, "I really did not expect that the two presidents talked for half an hour, without a word about their country, they were talking about us Haiti." He was deeply moved. Although the Haitian Prime Minister has been re-elected, Taiwan ’s reconstruction team is still there to help them build permanent houses, teach them to raise chickens, grow vegetables, and adopt many orphans. We will continue these tasks. Why do these things? We provide assistance with or without diplomatic relations, hoping to make everyone feel that the Republic of China is a constructive force in the international community and make the world a better place because of the existence of the Republic of China. This value makes a lot of People will silently support us on many occasions, which is a very important force for our country to settle down.


When the "Jasmine Revolution" occurred, many places were to evacuate overseas Chinese. Thank you very much for the representative in Jordan. When we evacuated Egyptians in Egypt, we were the first to evacuate and returned to Taiwan very safely. We should always be prepared for the crisis. The 1988 disaster hit Taiwan hardest. The biggest lesson is that this kind of instant and massive natural disaster is impossible to do a” rescue '' job, but because it is predictable, we can do a” defense '' job, so "Prevention" must be done in advance. In the past, it was very difficult for us to evacuate residents in sensitive areas. However, since the typhoon disaster of 1988, more than 7,800 people have been evacuated by Typhoon Bama. Fanna has more than 16,000 people evacuated. Especially Typhoon Fannabi, if not withdrawn, there will be hundreds of casualties in Pingtung's Laiyi Township. All this shows that the earlier you prepare, the more secure you are. Therefore, we put forward the concepts of” reporting the enemy to be lenient, guarding against the enemy with strictness '',” advancing deployment, pre-setting troops, and preventing at any time '' and” disaster prevention is more important than disaster relief, and disaster relief is better than disaster prevention. '' The losses are greatly reduced. So I just suggested to Minister Yang Jintian that after two years of hard work, the reconstruction area has shown a very different look. I encourage everyone to take the time to come back and see how they changed their new home to a new home, and then to a new home. process.


Finally, it is to provide efficient diplomatic service to the people. With so many countries granting visa-free treatment to Taiwan, the number of people going abroad will definitely increase, the pressure on overseas personnel will also increase, and the challenges will become more and more severe. Two days ago, Minister Yang complained to me that the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had been reduced by 1.2 billion yuan from 1991 to the present, and that the budget for 2011 would be reduced by 3 billion yuan. I believe that a lot of the money saved should not have been spent because we insisted on decent and honesty, and therefore reduced many unnecessary expenses. This is actually the way our diplomatic work should go. However, the workload of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has increased, especially in foreign countries, and the care for nationals needs to be more thoughtful. In particular, after we took office, in addition to the original New Zealand and Australia two countries, we have also added Japan, South Korea, Canada, and Germany, and the response has been very good. Germany originally had 200 places. As a result, it was full and it increased to 700. I hope that these activities will make our young people have a more international outlook and adapt to the changing international community. I also hope that everyone will continue to strengthen in this regard and make many people think "It is good to have a Ministry of Foreign Affairs!"
In the past two days, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is holding a special diplomatic exhibition of "Hundred Years of Inheritance, Going Out of Living". I have seen the preview and I am very touched. I hope that my colleagues will have a chance to see it. At the same time, you may take the opportunity to see the vitality of Taiwan, which is the southern reconstruction area. Finally, I wish you all a smooth and enjoyable stay in Taiwan these days. After returning, you will make every effort to make good use of the living path and improve relations. Bless everyone, thank you all.