Name of politician: Chen Shui-bian
Title of Speech: Candidate Chen speech on the eve of 2000 presidential election 
Date of Speech: 17/03/2000
Category: Campaign speech


Chinese Title of the speech: 陈水扁2000年总统选举选前之夜演讲
Time: 中華民國89年03月17日
Location: 台北市中山足球場的造勢晚會
Words：3300


Body of the speech:
我們最敬愛的，明天開始就是我們台灣新的執政黨主席林義雄林主席，我們台灣民主自由之父彭明敏彭教授，我們台灣人永遠的中心中央研究院李委員，阿扁的老師全台灣憲法的權威李鴻禧李教授、歷屆各位主席、我們未來的副總統，也是我們台灣歷史以來第一位女性的副總統呂秀蓮，各位先進同志、各位黨職、公職各位先進同志、各位嘉賓、各位父老鄉親、兄弟姊妹、少年朋友、小朋友，大家晚安大家恭喜大家好。


今天晚上我們台北市非常的美麗，這是有史以來最大的盛會，也是有史以來最偉大的民主之夜。只有真正的民主才是最美麗的對不對?剛才阿扁在台中坐飛機回台北，在飛機上空中看下來，阿扁看到大家在中山足球場裡裡外外都是人，剛才我做車子要進來的時候，從中山北路、民族東路、酒泉街，包括我們捷運的沿線都是人，所以，超過四十萬人參加今天的民主之夜，難怪台北市今天的夜晚這麼樣的漂亮對不對?明天我們就要來投票了，天亮我們就要來投票，要來選出中華民國第十任的總統、副總統，要來選出台灣民選以來第二屆的總統、副總統，我相信大家已經都準備好了。我們不只要為台灣選一個新的未來，最重要我們也是為了下一代一個非常學習的東西，這是最好的教育，也是最好的示範。


在飛機上的時候，阿扁看到自由晚報的一份專欄文章，中研院蕭新煌教授所寫的，從318到520他提醒我們明天要投下神聖一票的時候，我們應該做如何的選擇，到底我們要讓從窮困當中成長、有理想可以改革的人來當選?還是要讓舊的國民黨繼續的執政下去，或者要讓舊的特權勢力復僻，完全在我們手中的神聖一票，我們該如何抉擇，特別蕭新煌教授又指出我們要為我們的下一代、我們的孩子來找，到底誰可以做我們孩子的好榜樣，是要學那位殷實的人呢?是要學那位買票的人呢?或者要學那個不老實的人呢?或者要學那位阿舍囝(公子哥)或者要學台灣之子呢?如果我們選擇要讓我們的孩子學那位會A錢的人，或者那一位買票的人，這是一個最錯誤最不好的民主教育，因為我們大家知道這屆選總統竟然有人在買票，大家都有聽過台灣頭到台灣尾東部到西部，很多人已經拿到錢。選總統買票已經變成國際新聞，上國際媒體這是一件非常羞恥的事情。今天我們選出買票的人做我們的總統，我們的孩子來學他做一個對象，在這我要拜託所有的爸爸、媽媽，我們各位阿公、阿罵來做一個思考，如果選那位會A錢的人，我相信未來我們孩子難教育。如果要學這款，我們孩子如果做我們不歡喜的事情，我們是要怎麼對他教訓?同樣的道理，一位不老實的人、說謊的人要怎麼作為孩子學習的對象呢。今天阿扁要來提醒大家四年前，這位A錢的人、說謊的人，竟然口口聲聲要替李登輝先生擋子彈，當時還將台幣換成美金匯去美國。我真的很想問他，他到底當時是怎麼想的?怎麼對台灣這麼沒有信心，一樣的道理，那一組的總統、副總統候選人，兩個家庭加起來不過11個人，竟然有7張外國的護照，我真的也要請問他，竟然對台灣這麼樣的沒有信心，怎麼可能台灣人民會把重責大任來交給他，難道台灣人民是這麼樣的好欺騙的嗎?我不相信、我不相信。


李遠哲，中研院的院長，他在三月五號的公開演講，特別提到五年跟五十年的觀念，台灣政府如果在未來的五年，沒有真正的改革就會影響到台灣未來五十年的發展，尤其在21世紀之初，台灣的改革如果無法成功讓台灣在國際上社會居於領先地位，一旦落後台灣要向上提升，要迎頭趕上就會非常困難，我們真的很感動也非常欽佩李遠哲院長最後說明站出來，很多很多社會的菁英、很多很多社會的清流、很多很多社會的賢達，也都跟他一樣站了出來，我們真的非常感動。我相信李院長站出來，這些學術界的領袖、企業界的領袖、文化界的領袖還沒站出來，不是因為陳水扁跟呂秀蓮而站出來，也不是因為民進黨而站出來，我相信他們站出來是為公理站出來、為正義站出來、為真理站出來。他們沒有站在黑金那一邊，也沒有站在反改革腐化無能的那邊，他們全部站在改革這邊、正確歷史的這一邊。所以，我們要號召全民同胞，包括爸爸媽媽們、婦女同胞、年輕朋友，我們都應要向李遠哲院長、以及社會這一些社會清流一樣，全部為真理、正義、公理站出來。我們已經接近勝利，我們已經接近當選，但是我還是要再次提醒大家有信心更要小心，不能夠大意，無論如何明天一定要出來投票，更要返鄉投票。我們每一個人的每一張選票，每一張機票每一張車票，都可以改變台灣的未來、都可以改寫台灣的歷史，請大家不要缺席投票好不好!很久，非常正確的公平，我們已經得到三十六趴以上的得票率，換作選票超過四百二十三萬，我們已經跨過當選的門檻了。


所以，阿扁作為新的國家領導人，人民意志的實現者，我要在這個地方對全民提出五點保證:第一，阿扁作為台灣的新總統，我一定為捍衛台灣國家安全，追求台海的永久和平，追求台灣的主權永久確保，不可以讓人和國家吞併。第二，阿扁作為國家新的領導人，我一定要改善社會治安，消除黑金政治。從事經濟改革、政治改革、社會改革、教育改革、司法改革、心靈改革，要讓所有台灣人民安定大賺錢。特別阿扁總統，一定會維護我們金融的穩定、股市健全、保證上萬點。第三，阿扁以作為民進黨黨員為榮為傲，阿扁會繼續為民進黨來付出奉獻。但是當阿扁當選總統以後，我不是民進黨一黨專屬的總統，我是全國兩千三百萬同胞不分黨派、不分族群、不分省籍、不分性別的全民總統。所以為了維持落實台灣的國家利益高於政黨利益跟個人利益，在阿扁五月二十號就職總統以後，我會辭掉民進黨的中常委職務，我會不參與接下來的民進黨的黨務運作。換句話說，民進黨絕對不會以黨領政，黨政不分，好不好。第四點，阿扁在明天當選總統以後，我會立即成立一個包括民進黨、國民黨、新黨、建國黨及其他無黨無派的人士代表，來組成跨黨派小組。由李遠哲院長擔任召集人，我們要面對最近海峽兩岸的緊張關係、誤會跟誤解，我們會拿出積極的善意，來展開跟中國的諮商跟溝通。當然之前最重要的是，透過這樣的跨黨派的小組凝聚全民的共識、朝野的共識，因為我們認為未來的兩岸的談判，不是一人談判、一黨談判，而是全民談判。最後一點，阿扁在明天當選總統以後，我們也會透過這個跨黨派小組，能夠針對選舉期間所帶來的不必要的對立跟矛盾，來做溝通以最大的包容來化解歧見，來凝聚共識來做好重建的工作。當然對其他不同的總統候選人所提出的政見，只要是有益於國家、有益於人民，阿扁總統不會因人廢言，也不會因黨而廢言，我們一定會好好研究，加以非常作為阿扁總統主政之下的施政重要參考。


    在這一年多的時間，阿扁走遍全國，很多人在問我阿扁，你真的不會累嗎?我要跟大家講，腳會痠，手會痛，但是阿扁的心不會累。看到我們大家我不會累，看到我的太太我不會累，只要我們的心不累，只要我們的心還在溫溫燒燒，不會累。我們就有體力，我們就有力量，我們就能為我們台灣找出更美好的未來，對吧!今年剛好是我跟我的太太吳淑珍結婚25周年，25年來給我太太坐輪椅15年，接下還有一輩子。但是我們無怨無悔，我們面對各種的壓力、挫折跟圍剿。我們也從來不以為意，就像我的成長過程學二十年，在艱困中來長大，面對各種不順，面對各種的負擔，各種的恥笑。阿扁從來沒有忘記各種機會跟可能，阿扁堅信人窮只要志不窮，我們就有機會就有未來，所以五十年來，前二十年讓阿扁養成一個非常獨立、堅韌的個性，就像李遠哲院長所說的:艱困中成長的人，有著最美好的理想。
兩年前的台北市市長選舉，阿扁失敗了，我感謝大家給我休息、反省的機會，但是我仍然不解，很多人說阿扁失敗了，不可能再爬起來。甚至還有我們的對手這樣的笑我，說阿扁連市長都選輸了，憑什麼還能夠競選總統?我真的輸了嗎?阿扁跟大家一樣，都是台灣之子，都是番薯仔，從無到有，由下而上，在有限的條件裡面，在最惡劣的環境之下，我們都要開創無限的可能，對不對!


支持陳水扁，就是支持李遠哲，給陳水扁一票就是給我們社會清流一個希望，再次懇求大家，明天從家裡走到投票所，也許對個人來講只是一小步，但是我們能夠一起用選票來改寫歷史，用愛來創造歷史。來完成政黨輪替，讓民進黨扶正，絕對是我們台灣歷史民主的一大步，阿扁再次的懇求大家，拜託各位讓我們一起用選票來改改寫歷史，用愛來創造歷史，好不好!謝謝大家，祝福各位，謝謝。


Google Translate：


Our most beloved, who will be Taiwan ’s new ruling party ’s chairman since tomorrow, Lin Yixiong Lin, our father of Taiwan ’s democracy and freedom, Professor Peng Mingmin Peng, we Taiwan ’s eternal center member of the Central Research Institute, and Li ’s teacher. Authoritative Professor Li Hongxi, all previous chairmen, our future vice presidents, and our first female vice president in Taiwan ’s history, Lu Xiulian, advanced comrades, party positions, advanced comrades in public office, distinguished guests, fellow fathers and mothers, brothers Good night, sisters, teenage friends, children, congratulations.


This evening our Taipei city is very beautiful. This is the biggest event ever and the greatest democracy night ever. Only true democracy is the most beautiful, right? I took a plane back to Taipei in Taichung and looked down on the plane. I saw everyone inside and outside the Zhongshan football stadium. I just made a car. When coming in, people are from Zhongshan North Road, Minzu East Road, Jiuquan Street, including our MRT. So, with more than 400,000 people participating in today ’s democratic night, it is no wonder that Taipei City is so beautiful today. Is that right? Tomorrow we are going to vote. At dawn we are going to vote. We are going to choose the tenth president and vice president of the Republic of China. We are going to choose the second president and vice president since Taiwan ’s election. I believe everyone has already It's all ready. We don’t just choose a new future for Taiwan. Most importantly, we are also learning something for the next generation. This is the best education and the best demonstration.


While on the plane, I saw a column from Liberty Evening News written by Professor Xiao Xinhuang of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. From 318 to 520, he reminded us that when we want to cast a sacred vote tomorrow, what choices should we make? Should we vote for someone who grow out of poverty, having ideals and determining to implement the reform? Or should we vote for the old Kuomintang, letting them continue to rule and revitalizing the old privileged power? A sacred vote is completely in each of our hands. How should we choose? In particular, Professor Xiao Xinhuang also pointed out that we are looking for our next generation and our children. Who can be a good role model for our children? Should we learn from the wealthy man? Should  we learn from the person who buys the ticket? ? Or should we learn from the dishonest person? Or should we learn from the one born with a silver spoon or to learn the son of Taiwan? If we choose to let our children learn the person who is abusing the public funds, or that a ticket-buyer, this is the most wrong and worst democratic education. Because we all know that some people are buying tickets in this presidential election. Many people have got the money. A president candidate buying his ticket has become international news, and it is a very shameful thing for Taiwan to show in the international media because of this. Today we selected the person who bought the ticket to be our president, and our children came to learn him as an object. Here I want to ask all the fathers and mothers, we grandpas and curses, to think about it. If we vote for the one who is abusing the public funds, I believe that it will be difficult for our children to educate in the future. If we want to learn this, if our children do things that we don’t like, how can we teach him? The same reason, how can an unscrupulous person and a liar be the model of the children. Today, I am going to remind everyone that four years ago, this corruptive person and the liar even said that he wanted to block the bullets for Mr. Lee Teng-hui, and at that time he exchanged Taiwan dollars for US dollars and went to the United States. I really wanted to ask him, what exactly did he think then? Why was he so unconfident in Taiwan? Similarly, the two families of the presidential and vice presidential candidates from the other group has 11 people in total, but there were 7 of them have foreign passports. I really want to ask him, if he has no confidence in Taiwan, how can the Taiwanese people give him the heavy responsibility? Does he think the Taiwanese people so easily to be deceived? ,I do not believe. I do not believe.


Yuan Tseh Lee, the dean of the Chinese Academy of Research, gave a public speech on March 5th, especially mentioning the concept of five years and fifty years. If the Taiwan government does not have real reforms in the next five years, it will affect Taiwan in the next 50 years. Development, especially at the beginning of the 21st century, if Taiwan's reforms fail to make Taiwan a leader in the international community, it will be very difficult to catch up with Taiwan once it lags behind Taiwan. We are really moved and admire Dean Yuan Tseh Lee In the end, it stood out that a lot of elites in society, a lot of society's clear stream, a lot of society's talents, also stood up like him, we are really moved. I believe President Li stood up. These academic leaders, business leaders, and cultural leaders stood out not because of Chen Shui-bian and my partner Annette Lu, nor because of the DPP. I believe they stood up because they want to stand for the right things, for justice and for truth. They are not on the side of black gold politics, or on the side of anti-reform and corruption. They are all on the side of reform and the side of correct history. Therefore, we must call on all our fellow citizens, including our parents, including our parents, women, and young friends. We should all like the dean of Yuan Tseh Lee, other righteous and honest men and all of which stand for truth, justice, and justice. We are close to victory, we are close to being elected, but I still want to remind you again that you have to be more confident and be careful, not to be careless. You must come out and vote tomorrow, anyway. Every vote, every fight ticket an coach ticket can change the future of Taiwan and rewrite Taiwan ’s history. Please don’t vote in absentia, please! For a long time, it ’s very correct and fair. We ’ve got With a voting rate of over thirty-six, in exchange for more than 4.23 million votes, we have crossed the threshold for election.


Therefore, as the new leader of the country and the implementer of the people's will, I would like to offer five guarantees to the entire people in this place: First, as the new president of Taiwan, I must protect the national security of Taiwan and pursue the Taiwan Strait. The permanent peace of Taiwan and the pursuit of Taiwan's sovereignty will ensure that it cannot be annexed by people and the country. Second, as the new leader of the country, I must improve social security and eliminate black politics. To engage in economic reform, political reform, social reform, education reform, judicial reform, and spiritual reform, we must make all Taiwanese people stable and profitable. In particular, as a president , I will certainly maintain our financial stability, sound stock market, and guarantee tens of thousands of points. Third, I am proud to be a member of the DPP, and I will continue to contribute to the DPP. But when I am elected president, I will not be president of the DPP only. I will be the president of  the country ’s 23 million people, regardless of their party, ethnic group, province, or gender. Therefore, in order to maintain the realization of Taiwan ’s national interests above party interests and personal interests, after I taking office as president on May 20, I will resign from the DPP ’s Central Standing Committee. I will not participate in the next DPP Party affairs. In other words, the DPP will never ruling the country under its party system and making no difference between the party and the country . Fourthly, after I am elected president tomorrow, I will immediately set up a representative of the DPP, the KMT, the New Party, the Founding Party, and other non-party parties to form a cross-party group. I will appoint Dean Yuan Tseh Lee as the convener, we have to face the recent tensions, misunderstandings and misunderstandings between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits. We will show positive goodwill to start consultations and communication with China. Of course, the most important thing before is to consolidate the consensus of the whole people and the consensus of the government and the public through such cross-party groups, because we believe that the future cross-strait negotiations will not be one-person negotiations or one-party negotiations, but national negotiations. Finally, after I am elected president tomorrow, we will also use this cross-party group to communicate with the needless oppositions and contradictions brought about during the election, to resolve differences with the greatest tolerance, and to build consensus. Do a good job of reconstruction. Of course, as for the political opinions put forward by different presidential candidates, as long as it is good for the country and the people, I will not refrain the freedom of the speech no matter who he is or which party he comes from. We will definitely study this policy carefully. It will serves as an important reference for the administration of President Chen Shui-bian.


Over the past year, I have traveled all over the country. Many people are asking me , are you really not tired? I want to tell you that your feet will be sore and your hands will hurt, but my heart is not Will be tired. I don’t get tired of seeing all of us, I don’t get tired of seeing my wife, as long as our heart is not tired, as long as our heart is still burning, it won’t be tired. We have physical strength, we have strength, and we can find a better future for our Taiwan, right! This year is just the 25th anniversary of my wife Wu Shuzhen ’s marriage. I ’ve been in a wheelchair for 15 years for 25 years. There is a lifetime. But we have no regrets, we face all kinds of pressure, frustration and siege. We have never thought of it, just like my 20 years of growing up, growing up in hardship, facing all kinds of discomforts, facing all kinds of burdens, all kinds of smirks. I have never forgotten all opportunities and possibilities. My firmly believes that as long as people are poor, we have a chance to have a future. So for the past 20 years, I have developed a very independent and tough personality. As Dean Yuan Tseh Lee said: People who grow up in hardship have the best ideals.


The election of the mayor of Taipei two years ago, I failed. I thank everyone for giving me the opportunity to rest and reflect, but I still don’t understand. Many people say that I have failed and cannot climb up again. Our opponent even laughed at me like this, saying that Chen Shui-bian even lost in the election of mayor, why can he run for president? Am I really losing? Like everyone, I am the son of Taiwan and a sweet potato which is resilient and tough. We come from nothing. We come from the bottom. We come from the limited conditions and in the harshest conditions. But we all have to create infinite possibilities. Is that right?


To support Chen Shui-bian is to support Yuan Tseh Lee. Giving Chen Shui-bian a vote is to give our society a hope, especially for the decent people. We ask everyone to walk from home to the polls tomorrow. Maybe it is just a small step for individuals, but we can use votes to rewrite history and make history with love. To complete the rotation of political parties and let the DPP make things right is definitely a big step in our historical democracy in Taiwan. I once again ask everyone to use your votes to rewrite history and use love to create history, OK? Thank you, and bless you all, thank you.