Name of politician: Tsai Ing-wen
Title of Speech: Nation of Resilience, Forward into the World -President Tsai delivers 2019 National Day Address
Date of Speech: 10/10/2019
Category: Famous speech


Chinese Title of the speech: 堅韌之國 前進世界 
Location: 總統出席「中華民國中樞暨各界慶祝108年國慶大會」
Time: 中華民國108年10月10日
Words: 2224


Body of the speech: 


大會主席蘇嘉全院長、現場各位貴賓、電視機前和網路上的全體國人同胞，大家早安，大家好。


今天，是中華民國一百零八年的國慶日，謝謝來自世界各地的好朋友，跟我們共度這個值得紀念的日子。 這一天是屬於全國2300萬人民的日子。我要感謝馬前總統、呂前副總統、吳前副總統及各政黨主席一起前來慶祝國慶。


去年，也是在國慶日，我和大家說，台灣正處在變局當中。世界貿易局勢的變動、國際政治情勢的變化，都讓未來充滿挑戰。我們必須「求穩、應變、進步」，厚植實力、壯大台灣。


轉眼又過了一年，世界依然快速變化，甚至更加劇烈。美中貿易戰的持續進行；距離我們不遠的香港，因為「一國兩制」的失敗，正處於失序邊緣。


儘管如此，中國依然以「一國兩制台灣方案」，不斷威脅我們，並採取各種文攻武嚇，強烈挑戰了區域的穩定及和平。


各位國人同胞，當自由民主受到挑戰，當中華民國的生存發展受到脅迫，我們就必須站出來捍衛。拒絕「一國兩制」，是兩千三百萬台灣人民不分黨派、不分立場，彼此間最大的共識。


中華民國已經在台灣屹立超過七十年，一旦接受「一國兩制」，中華民國就沒有生存的空間。身為總統，站出來守護國家主權，不是挑釁，而是我最基本的責任。


七十年來，我們共同經歷過種種嚴峻的挑戰。每一次挑戰，不但沒有擊倒我們，反而讓我們更強壯、更堅定。


我們一起走過八二三砲戰，一起度過一九九六年台海危機。一次又一次文攻武嚇，從來就沒有讓台灣人民屈服。我們共同捍衛住腳下這塊土地，也捍衛住國家的主權。


我們經歷過退出聯合國的恐慌，也承受過一次又一次的斷交壓力。但台灣人民想要走向世界的決心，不曾有任何改變。


一九七零年代的石油危機，一九九七年的亞洲金融風暴，千禧年的網路泡沫，還有十年前的金融海嘯。經濟總是充滿挑戰，但一卡皮箱走遍天下的台商，加上勤奮又有創意的台灣人民，讓我們一次又一次，把危機化做轉機，讓台灣的經濟持續往前走。


我們也經歷過八七水災、九二一地震、SARS風暴、八八風災。天災病變的磨難，沒有擊敗過台灣人民奮鬥生存的意志。家園毀壞了，我們重建；土地受傷了，我們復原。擦乾眼淚，重新站起，明天又是充滿希望的一天。




這些共同的記憶，彰顯了台灣人民的韌性。因為有這樣的韌性，我們成為亞洲四小龍的一員。因為這樣的韌性，我們走過了民主化的艱鉅歷程，成為世界上重要的民主典範。


我們共同走過這一段路，無論是哪個黨派，只要是生活在這塊土地上的人民，都不能分割彼此。中華民國不是誰的專利，台灣也不是誰能夠獨佔。「中華民國台灣」六個字，既不是藍色、也不是綠色，這就是整個社會最大的共識。


展望未來，前方的挑戰還有很多，等著我們一一克服。


我們看見中國崛起跟擴張，以威權體制，結合民族主義和經濟力量，挑戰自由民主的價值和世界秩序。也因此，處於印太地區戰略前緣的台灣，成為了守護民主價值的第一道防線。


中國利用「銳實力」步步進逼，但我們很清楚，作為區域的重要成員，台灣要善盡國際責任。我們不挑釁、不冒進，結合理念相近的國家，確保台海和平穩定的現狀，不會被片面改變。


要做到這些，我們必須要團結。儘管台灣社會曾經因為族群、世代、信仰、黨派的差異，而出現爭執，但透過對話，我們一定可以找到彼此可以接受的最大公約數。經驗證明，衝突、對話、團結進步，會引導國家往正確的方向前進。


我們也必須堅守自由民主的價值。台灣人民曾經一起走過民主化的艱辛道路，民主偶有紛擾，但只有民主制度，能夠保障得來不易的自由，也才能讓下一代保有決定未來的權利。




我們也必須持續壯大台灣。三年多來，我們努力調整經濟結構，引導產業升級轉型、推動國際多元布局。我們迎來投資大爆發，在全球經濟的變動中，站穩了腳步，方向是對的，我們就要繼續走。


三年多來，我們努力維護社會公平，加薪減稅、全面照顧，讓全民分享經濟成長的果實。未來，推動長照2.0升級，推動幼托補助擴大，減輕民眾負擔，使人人可以享有優質的照顧，是政府要繼續努力的方向。


三年多來，我們推動國防自主、採購先進武器，提升國軍士氣，強化充足戰力。國造高教機的原型機剛剛出廠，國造艦艇也將陸續加入建軍行列。捍衛國土、堅守自由民主，國軍責無旁貸。


三年多來，我們積極參與國際，負責任、肯貢獻，成為維護區域和平穩定，不可或缺的良善力量。我們會持續和理念相近的國家攜手，爭取更多實質合作的機會。


未來的路線很清楚，目標也很明確。


第一，讓國人繼續團結在自由民主的旗幟下，捍衛國家主權。


第二，持續壯大台灣，強化經濟實力，讓民富而國強。


第三，積極走向世界，克服挑戰，讓中華民國台灣在國際舞台上抬頭挺胸，勇敢自信。


上一季，我們的經濟成長率，已經重返亞洲四小龍之首。世界經濟論壇評比我們是四大「超級創新國」之一。我們的高科技和創新產業，也走在世界的最前端。


我們的體育選手、我們的技能國手，無數充滿創意的設計師、藝術家，在國際舞台發光發熱，帶給台灣榮耀和驕傲。


我們自製的福衛五號，以及福衛七號接連升空，展現太空科技實力。就連人類歷史上第一次觀測到的黑洞影像，也有台灣科學團隊的參與。


當我們可以上太空，可以看見五千五百萬光年外的黑洞，那麼，眼前還有什麼挑戰，是我們沒有勇氣面對的？


歷史的磨難，會因為我們的韌性，而被轉化為成長力量。天災的挑戰，會因為我們的努力，而成為再生的契機。這塊土地上每一個人的努力，都讓我們的國家，一天一天變得更好、更進步。


在國慶日這一天，這塊土地上的所有人民，都團結在自由民主的旗幟下，樂觀面對未來、堅定克服挑戰。天佑台灣，台灣加油，中華民國加油。謝謝大家。


Official Translation


https://english.president.gov.tw/NEWS/5869


National Day Celebration Chairperson Su Jia-chyuan, distinguished guests, and my fellow citizens watching via TV or the Internet:


Good morning.


Today is the 108th National Day of the Republic of China. I would like to thank all our friends from around the world who have come to commemorate this day with us.


Today belongs to the 23 million people who call Taiwan home. I would also like to thank former President Ma Ying-jeou, former Vice President Annette Lu, former Vice President Wu Den-yih, and Chairs of Political Parties for joining us to celebrate National Day.


Last year, on National Day, I told everyone that Taiwan was in the midst of change. Changes in the global trade situation and the international political scene led to a future rife with challenges. I said that we must seek stability, adaptability, and progress, and build a stronger Taiwan.


Another year has quickly passed. The world is still changing fast, and the changes are even more dramatic. The US-China trade dispute continues. And not far from Taiwan, Hong Kong is on the verge of chaos due to the failure of "one country, two systems."


Nevertheless, China is still threatening to impose its "one country, two systems model for Taiwan." Their diplomatic offensives and military coercion pose a serious challenge to regional stability and peace.


My fellow citizens, when freedom and democracy are challenged, and when the Republic of China's existence and development are threatened, we must stand up and defend ourselves. The overwhelming consensus among Taiwan's 23 million people is our rejection of "one country, two systems," regardless of party affiliation or political position.


The Republic of China has stood tall on Taiwan for over 70 years. But if we were to accept "one country, two systems," there would no longer be room for the Republic of China's existence. As President, standing up to protect national sovereignty is not a provocation—it is my fundamental responsibility.


For 70 years, we have faced many serious challenges together. Rather than defeating us, these challenges have made us stronger and more determined.


We endured the August 23 Artillery War of 1958 in Kinmen, and the Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1996 together. Time and again, the people of Taiwan have faced diplomatic offensives and military coercion without ever backing down. Together, we have defended the land on which we stand and our national sovereignty.


We endured the panic following our withdrawal from the United Nations and repeatedly withstood the pressure of severed diplomatic ties. Yet the determination of the Taiwanese people to embrace the world has never wavered.


The oil crisis of the 1970s, the Asian financial crisis of 1997, the 2000 dot-com bubble, and the financial crisis of a decade ago—there are always economic challenges. Yet time and time again, Taiwanese businesspeople, willing to go out into the world armed with only a briefcase, and hardworking and innovative Taiwanese people, have turned crises into opportunities and kept our economy moving forward. 


We endured the August 7 Flood of 1959, the 921 Earthquake of 1999, the SARS outbreak of 2003, and Typhoon Morakot in 2009. The hardships of natural disasters and disease outbreaks have never defeated the Taiwanese people's will to survive. When our homeland is devastated, we rebuild it. When our land is damaged, we restore it. We wipe away our tears and stand up once again, because tomorrow is a new day, full of hope.


These shared memories exemplify the resilience of Taiwan's people, a resilience that led us to become one of the Four Asian Tigers, a resilience that led us on the arduous path of democratization to become an important global model of democracy.


After walking this path together, we cannot be divided amongst ourselves, regardless of party affiliation. No one has a patent on the Republic of China, and no one can monopolize Taiwan. The words "Republic of China (Taiwan)" are not the exclusive property of any one political party, and that is the overwhelming consensus of Taiwan society.


Looking to the future, there are many challenges awaiting us that we must overcome.


We are witnessing China's rise and expansion, as they challenge free, democratic values and the global order through a combination of authoritarianism, nationalism, and economic might. As the strategic forefront of the Indo-Pacific region, Taiwan has become the first line of defense for democratic values.


China is encroaching on us through their sharp power, but as a crucial member of the region, we know that Taiwan must fulfill its responsibilities to the international community. We will not act provocatively or rashly; rather, we will work with like-minded countries to ensure that the peaceful and stable cross-strait status quo is not unilaterally altered.


In order to accomplish this, we must remain united. Though disputes have risen in our society due to differences among ethnicities, generations, faiths, and political views, I am certain that we can find the greatest common denominator among us through dialogue. Experience tells us that conflict, dialogue, and united progress help to lead a country on the right path forward.


We must also hold firm our values of freedom and democracy. The Taiwanese people walked the difficult path to democratization together, and though it may sometimes be tumultuous, only democracy can ensure our hard-won freedom and offer the next generation the right to choose their own future.


We must also continue to build a stronger Taiwan. Over the past three years, we have strived to adjust our economic structure by assisting in industrial upgrade and transition and promoting international diversification. Even as the global economy continues to change rapidly, we are seeing explosive growth in investments. We are steadily moving in the right direction, and we must continue forward.


Over the past three years, we have strived to create a fair society. We have raised wages, cut taxes, and provided comprehensive care, so that everyone can reap the benefits of our economic growth. Looking to the future, our administration will continue working to reduce the burden on citizens and ensure everyone receives outstanding care by enhancing our Long-term Care 2.0 Plan and promoting the expansion of subsidies for early childhood education and care.


Over the past three years, we have developed our national defense industries and purchased advanced weapons, boosting military morale and enhancing our combat capabilities. We recently completed production of our first self-manufactured advanced training aircraft prototype, and domestically produced naval vessels will soon join our ranks as well. Our armed forces are duty-bound to defend our country and stand firm in upholding freedom and democracy.


Over the past three years, we have actively taken part in international affairs. Taiwan is responsible and willing to contribute, and we have become an indispensable force for good in maintaining regional peace and stability. We will continue to work hand-in-hand with like-minded countries to achieve more opportunities for substantive cooperation.


Our future path is clear, as are our goals.


First, we must ensure that the people continue to remain united under the banner of freedom and democracy to defend our sovereignty.


Second, we must continue to build a stronger Taiwan and bolster our economic capabilities to create a prosperous society and powerful country.


Third, we must actively engage with the world and overcome challenges, so that the Republic of China (Taiwan) can hold its head high on the international stage with bravery and confidence.


Last quarter, we reclaimed the top spot among the Four Asian Tigers for GDP growth. The World Economic Forum ranked us as one of the world's top four "super innovators," and our hi-tech and innovative industries are world-leading.


Taiwan's athletes, skills competitors, and countless creative designers and artists are shining on the international stage and bringing honor and pride to Taiwan.


Our self-developed FORMOSAT-5 and FORMOSAT-7 have both been launched into space, a testament to our prowess in aerospace technology. A team of scientists from Taiwan also contributed to capturing the world's first images of a black hole.


If we can go into space, and see a black hole 55 million lightyears away, how could we not have the courage to face the challenges ahead of us?


Our resilience has transformed history's trials into the power to grow and evolve. Our efforts have transformed natural disasters into opportunities for rebirth. Each day, our homeland is made better thanks to the efforts of all who call this place home.


On National Day, all citizens remain united under the banner of freedom and democracy. We will face the future with optimism and overcome challenges with determination. God bless Taiwan. Let's go, Taiwan. Let's go, Republic of China. Thank you.