Name of politician: Chen Shui-bian
Title of Speech: President Chen Delivers a Speech at 29th annual conference of World Federation of Taiwanese Associations (WFTA) (through video)
Date of Speech: 03/08/2002
Category: Ribbon-cutting speech


Chinese Title of the speech: 總統以視訊直播方式於世界台灣同鄉聯合會第二十九屆年會中致詞
Time: 中華民國91年08月03日
Words: 1385


Body of the speech: 


首先阿扁要恭喜大家，第二十九屆世台會年會今天在日本東京盛大的舉行，再一次顯現海外鄉親對台灣這片土地的熱愛以及各地台灣同鄉會旺盛的活力，一定能夠帶領著世台會走向新的發展和新的境界，為台灣的未來繼續努力，及打拼。 長久以來世台會對台灣政治的民主、社會的開放以及人權的保障，做出重大的貢獻。在過去充滿著苦難和最黑暗的日子，因為有大家的犧牲和奉獻，讓台灣民主的香火在海外延續下去，同時也不斷對台灣的民主運動提供援助，並刺激島內的民眾認真思考台灣的前途和未來。最後在公元2000年，新世紀將要來臨之時，終於實現了大家的願望，完成了政黨的輪替以及政權的和平移轉，讓台灣成為一個完全自由民主的國家，並以這光榮的成就站在全世界上。 另一方面，世台會多年來為了確保台灣的主體性，讓國際社會能夠聽到台灣人民的心聲，同樣不斷奉獻心力。過去大家愛台灣，不怕犧牲，很多鄉親受到迫害，長年流亡海外不能回到故鄉。不過，各位的努力和付出並沒有白白浪費，大家長久以來所堅持的理念，例如：台灣主權獨立絕對不能被剝奪和限制、台灣的前途必須由台灣人民自己決定以及台灣的利益優先等等，現在不但都已經成為台灣民意的主流，同時也已經得到國際社會普遍的重視。 我們要對自己有信心，對台灣的未來有信心。


過去大家不怕強權的欺侮，抱著對故鄉台灣的愛，堅持走自己的路，最後為台灣走出一條自由民主的大路。今日台灣面對中共武力的威脅和在國際上的打壓，我們絕對不能逃避也不能有任何的幻想，只要大家團結一致，站穩自己的腳步，把握住自己的方向，阿扁相信一定能夠再一次走出我們的路，走出台灣的前途，為台灣人的尊嚴和國家的安全開創新的局勢，同時也為台灣社會的繁榮與進步，建立更加堅強的基礎。 阿扁要再一次祝福今年的年會圓滿順利成功，並誠心的期待在郭會長的帶領之下和各位鄉親熱情的參與和支持，世台會一定會不斷成長壯大，繼續為台灣發聲，積極提升台灣在世界的地位，全面開拓台灣在國際生存的空間。 在此，個人也要提出幾點呼籲，請大家共同認真的思考：
 一、阿扁這幾天有講，我們必須要認真思考，要走自己的路，走我們台灣的路，走出我們台灣的前途，什麼叫「我們台灣自己的路」，很簡單，也很清楚，非常明白，我們自己台灣的路就是台灣的民主之路、台灣的自由之路、台灣的人權之路、台灣的和平之路。


 二、台灣是我們的國家，我們的國家不能被欺負、被矮化、被邊緣化及地方化，台灣不是別人的一部分；不是別人的地方政府、別人的一省，台灣也不能成為第二個香港、澳門，因為台灣是一個主權獨立的國家，簡言之，台灣跟對岸中國一邊一國，要分清楚。 
三、中國一直不放棄對台灣使用武力，在國際上打壓台灣，這對台灣人民的感情有很大傷害，中國說的所謂「一個中國原則」或「一國兩制」就是對台灣現狀的改變，我們不可能接受，因為台灣的未來，台灣的現狀是否要改變？不是任何一個國家、任何一個政府、任何一個政黨、任何個人可以替我們決定，只有二千三百萬偉大的台灣人民，才有權利對台灣的前途、台灣的命運和現狀來做決定。而有需要的時候要如何決定？就是我們長期追求的理想和目標；也是大家共同的理念－公民投票，公民投票是基本人權，也是二千三百萬人民的基本人權，不能被剝奪和限制的，個人要誠懇的呼籲和鼓舞大家，要認真思考公民投票立法的重要性和迫切性。 


最後，阿扁也要敬祝在座的每一位朋友和鄉親，大家身體健康、萬事如意！


Google Translate：


First of all, I would like to congratulate everyone. The twenty-ninth session of the World Taiwan Conference was held in Tokyo, Japan today. Once again, the overseas folks ’love for the land of Taiwan and the vigorous vitality of Taiwanese fellow associations everywhere will surely lead. The World Taiwan will move towards new development and new realm, and continue to work hard for Taiwan's future. For a long time, Taiwan has made significant contributions to the democracy of Taiwan's politics, the openness of society, and the protection of human rights. In the past, full of suffering and the darkest days, because of everyone's sacrifice and dedication, the incense of Taiwan's democracy has continued overseas. At the same time, it has continued to provide assistance to Taiwan's democratic movement and stimulated the people on the island to seriously think about Taiwan's Future and future. Finally, in the year 2000, when the new century was approaching, everyone's wishes were finally realized, the rotation of political parties and the peaceful transfer of power were completed, and Taiwan became a completely free and democratic country. With this glorious achievement, All over the world. On the other hand, in order to ensure the subjectivity of Taiwan and ensure that the international community can hear the voice of the Taiwanese people, the World Trade Organization has also continuously contributed its efforts. In the past, everyone loved Taiwan and was not afraid of sacrifice. Many folks were persecuted. They could not return to their hometowns after exile for many years. However, everyone ’s efforts and efforts have not been wasted. Everyone ’s long-held beliefs, such as: Taiwan ’s sovereignty and independence must not be taken away and restricted, Taiwan ’s future must be determined by the Taiwan people themselves, and Taiwan ’s interests are prioritized. Now, Not only has it become the mainstream of public opinion in Taiwan, but it has also received widespread attention from the international community. We must have confidence in ourselves and in the future of Taiwan.


In the past, everyone was not afraid of bullying by power, holding their love for their hometown of Taiwan, insisting on their own way, and finally found a free and democratic road for Taiwan. In the face of the threat of CCP's armed forces and international suppression today, Taiwan must not escape or have any illusions. As long as everyone is united, stand firm in their own footsteps, and grasp their own direction, I believe that he will definitely be able to do it again. We can find our way and also Taiwan's future, we will create a new situation for the dignity of Taiwanese people and the security of the country. At the same time, we will build a stronger foundation for the prosperity and progress of Taiwan society. I would like to once again wish this year's annual conference a complete success, and sincerely look forward to the enthusiastic participation and support of all the folks under the leadership of President Guo. The World Trade Organization will continue to grow and strengthen, continue to speak for Taiwan, and actively promote Taiwan's status in the world has fully explored Taiwan's space for international survival.此 Here, I also want to make a few appeals, please everyone to seriously consider:


I. I have said in the past few days that we must think carefully, take our own path, take our Taiwan path, and get out of our future in Taiwan. What is "our Taiwan's own path" is very simple and clear It is very clear that our own road to Taiwan is the road to democracy in Taiwan, the road to freedom in Taiwan, the road to human rights in Taiwan, and the road to peace in Taiwan.


2. Taiwan is our country. Our country cannot be bullied, dwarfed, marginalized, and localized. Taiwan is not a part of others. It is not another counntry ’s local government or another province. Taiwan cannot be a second. Hong Kong and Macau, because Taiwan is a sovereign and independent country. In short, Taiwan and China should be clearly separated.


3. China has never given up the use of force against Taiwan and suppressed Taiwan internationally. This has greatly hurt the feelings of the people of Taiwan. The so-called "one China principle" or "one country, two systems" that China says is a change in the status quo of Taiwan. We do not Maybe because of Taiwan ’s future, will the status quo in Taiwan be changed? Not any country, any government, any political party, any individual can decide for us. Only the 23 million great Taiwanese people have the right to make decisions on Taiwan's future, Taiwan's fate and status quo. How to decide when needed? These are the ideals and goals we have been pursuing for a long time; they are also the common concept of everybody-referendum, which is a basic human right and a basic human right of 23 million people. It cannot be deprived or restricted. Individuals should sincerely appeal and encourage everyone We must seriously consider the importance and urgency of referendum legislation.


In the end, I would also like to wish every friend and folks present here that everyone is in good health and good luck!