Name of politician: Chen Shui-bian
Title of Speech: International Conference on the Comparative Studies and Transitional Justice
Date of Speech: 28/07/2007
Category: Ribbon-cutting speech


Chinese Title of the speech: 總統出席「轉型正義經驗比較國際研討會」開幕典禮
Time: 中華民國96年07月28日
Location：Taiwan Thinktank, Taipei        
words: 1977        


Body of the speech


非常高興能夠應邀前來參加由「台灣智庫」所舉辦的「轉型正義經驗比較國際研討會」，尤其今天的會議特別將「不當黨產」的處理做為研討的焦點，格外具有歷史意義。
「不當黨產」是共產極權、黨國體制之下的畸形產物，然而「不當黨產」在台灣卻有兩個舉世獨有的特徵。第一，「不當黨產」在台灣是與市場經濟並存，結果衍生出台灣特有的「黨國資本主義」與「黑金體系」，政黨不但可以公然經營營利事業，更利用「不當黨產」與地方黑道結合，長期壟斷政治權力。第二，台灣也是全世界唯一的民主國家，在政黨輪替之後，「不當黨產」還能繼續存在而不被處理。


以東德為例，在兩德統一之前，東德成立第一個非共政權後，東德政府立即針對「不當黨產」進行清查與追討，但台灣歷經首次政黨輪替迄今將近八年，「不當黨產」的問題不但依然存在，甚至加速賤賣提前脫產，這是台灣在邁向政治民主化與國家正常化最大的缺失與遺憾。相信藉著「全民討黨產公民投票」的舉辦，透過人民力量與意志的展現，任何保守反動勢力、霸佔人民與國家財產的政黨都要低頭。


「中國國民黨」的「不當黨產」猶如一面照妖鏡，儘管相關的主其事者，不斷標榜有多麼高尚的道德標準，但事實證明，完全經不起「不當黨產」的檢驗，立刻現出「無恥」、「無賴」的原形。


2000年總統大選之前，「中國國民黨」的總統候選人連前主席信誓旦旦的說要歸還黨產並將黨產交付信託。敗選後，承諾就不算數。2004年總統大選，連前主席再次宣示要還財於民、還財於國。選輸了，說過的話再一次跳票。馬前主席就任後，宣示2008年總統大選之前要將「不當黨產」處理完畢，沒想到馬前主席所說的「處理」，竟然是加速賤賣與全面脫產，進一步凸顯了「中國國民黨」偽善與貪婪的本質。


「中國國民黨」的「不當黨產」是透過霸佔國家和人民財產、特權壟斷經營，以及接受政府不當補助與稅捐減免而來。依據財政部的清查，「中國國民黨」所擁有的「不當黨產」，包括不動產、歷年來委辦及補助經費、不當減免稅捐，以及黨職合併公職年資請領退休金等，合計451億7200萬元新台幣。而這只是目前政府初步清查的結果，未來將借鏡東德處理「不當黨產」的例子，凡是無法舉證是透過合法且正當手段取得的黨產，一律視為「不當黨產」，不管產權如何處分或移轉，任何一毛錢、一塊地、一棟房子都要追討回來，絕不因為被賤賣了或者脫產了就可以一筆勾消。


我們更注意到馬前主席任內，所有「不當黨產」的交易都是經由密室、黑箱作業，不但買賣的內容僅有馬前主席及身邊極少數人得以與聞，而買方的身分與資金來源更是諱莫如深，相關交易的條件與轉手的方式顯涉有各種的弊端與不合常理之處。


以「國發院」的土地交易為例，竟傳出合約包括要台北市政府配合協助變更地目，而「中視」、「中廣」及「中影」所謂「三中」的買賣，自始至終即涉嫌「假交易」、「虛設行號」及「圖利特定對象」等不法情事，不但交易各方已對簿公堂，甚至傳出有以選舉提名做為交換條件，使「三中」的交易不但成為各說各話的「羅生門」，更凸顯了「中國國民黨」在處理「不當黨產」的過程中，有「國庫」通「黨庫」，然後「黨庫」通「私庫」之嫌。


   依據「中國國民黨」於去年8月23日所公布的黨產報告，1994年「中國國民黨」正式登記為社團法人時，黨產淨值為385億元。2000年3月由李前主席交接給連前主席時黨產淨值增加到808億元，2005年8月馬前主席就任時則減為311億元，而依據最新資料，至今年7月15日再減少為254億5700餘萬元。短短的7年多，「中國國民黨」的黨產淨值由808億元變成254億元，其中短少的554億元跑到哪裡去了，進了誰的口袋？


「中國國民黨」黨產的處理，絕對不是「中國國民黨」的家務事，更不可能任由少數人一手遮天，以為把錢花光，把黨產掏空、吃乾抹淨，事情就解決了。其中是否涉及貪腐背信、中飽私囊、利益輸送等不法情事，相關主其事者是否負有法律責任，甚至刑事責任，都必須清楚查明。我們支持反貪腐，但我們更要求「中國國民黨」對「消失的黨產」這一筆爛帳，必須給台灣社會、台灣人民一個清楚的交代。


2002年9月13日行政院院會通過將「政黨不當取得財產處理條例（草案）」送立法院審議，由於「中國國民黨」聯合部分在野政黨強力杯葛。執政黨不得不在去年開始發起「追討不當黨產」的公民投票，目前已經依法完成兩個階段的連署，而且自本月4日起，由各戶政機關進行連署書的審查，將在45天內完成。明年1月立法委員選舉時，就能以直接民權、公民投票的方式，讓公理與正義伸張，積極展現台灣人民追求自由、民主、人權與公義的堅定意志與決心。不過，話又說回來，整個關鍵仍然是有沒有辦法取得國會多數，我非常同意今天的貴賓、東德前總理德梅季耶閣下所說的一句話：關鍵仍然在國會，取得國會多數才能夠通過必要的相關法案，這一點仍然是關鍵。


最後，要再一次感謝「台灣智庫」用心舉辦這一場具有時代意義的研討會，並預祝今天的會議圓滿成功，在場所有的嘉賓、先進及朋友們，身體健康、萬事如意。


Google Translate：


I am very pleased to be invited to participate in the "International Seminar on Comparative Justice Experiences" organized by the "Taiwan Thinktank". In particular, today ’s conference specifically addressed the treatment of "Ill-gotten Party Assets" as the focus of the discussion, which is of historical significance.


"Ill-gotten Party Assets" is a deformed product under the Communist totalitarianism and the party-state system. However, "Ill-gotten Party Assets" in Taiwan has two unique characteristics that are unique to the world. First, "Ill-gotten Party Assets" coexists with the market economy in Taiwan. As a result, Taiwan's unique "party state capitalism" and "black gold system" have been derived. Political parties can not only openly make profit, but also use "Ill-gotten Party Assets" and local The combination of underworld and monopoly political power for a long time. Second, Taiwan is also the only democracy in the world where "Ill-gotten Party Assets" can continue to exist without being dealt with after the rotation of political parties.


Take East Germany as an example. Prior to the reunification of Germany and Germany, after the establishment of the first non-communist regime in East Germany, the East Germany government immediately investigated and pursued "Ill-gotten Party Assets." However, Taiwan has experienced the first party rotation for nearly eight years. Not only does the problem of "Ill-gotten Party Assets" persist, it even accelerates the sale of lower prices and early production. This is the biggest deficiency and regret in Taiwan's progress toward political democratization and the normalization of the country. It is believed that through the holding of the "referendum to ask back party property," and through the display of people's power and will, any political party that conservatively reacts and seizes the property of the people and the state must bow its heads.


The "Ill-gotten Party Assets" of the KMT looks like a ghost mirror. Although the relevant principals continue to advertise how noble moral standards are, it turns out that they can't stand the test of "Ill-gotten Party Assets" and immediately appear The original form of "shameless" and "rogue".


Prior to the 2000 presidential election, the presidential candidate of the KMT, Mr. Lien Chan even vowed to return the party property and hand it over to the trust. After defeated, his words didn't count. In the 2004 presidential election, even the former chairman Mr. Lien once again announced that he would return the wealth to the people and the country, when he lost the election, he went back on his words again. After the appointment of former Chairman of the KMT, Mr. Ma, he announced that the "Ill-gotten Party Assets" should be dealt with before the 2008 presidential election. I did not expect that the "handling" mentioned by former Chairman Ma was actually accelerating the bargain sale and full release, further highlighting the KMT The nature of hypocrisy and greed.


The "Ill-gotten Party Assets" of the KMT is derived from the occupation of state and people's property, privileged monopoly operations, and acceptance of improper government subsidies and tax reductions. According to the Ministry of Finance's inventory, the "Ill-gotten Party Assets" owned by the KMT includes real property, commissions and subsidies over the years, improper tax deductions and exemptions, and retirement benefits for party posts combined with public service, totaling 45.1 billion NT $ 72 million. This is only the result of the current government's preliminary investigation. In the future, we will follow the example of East Germany to deal with "Ill-gotten Party Assets" in Taiwan. Any party property that cannot be proved through legal and proper means will be regarded as "Ill-gotten Party Assets" regardless of property rights. No matter the KMT how to deal with or transfer, any dime, a piece of land, or a house belongs to the "Ill-gotten Party Assets" must be brought back and we will never stop even "Ill-gotten Party Assets" has been sold or released.


We have also noticed that during the term of the former Chairman of Mr. Ma, all "Ill-gotten Party Assets" transactions are carried out in secret rooms and black boxes. Not only is the content of the sale only known to the former Chairman of Mr. Ma and a handful of people around him, they also keep silence about the buyer’s identity and their sources of money. The conditions and the ways of their transaction are incomprehensible which contain a lot of disadvantages. 


Taking the land sale of the "National Development Institute" as an example, it was actually reported that the Taipei City Government's cooperation was required to assist in changing the land, and the so-called "three middle schools" of "Zhongshi", "Zhongguang" and "Zhongying" were suspected from beginning to end. "Fake transactions", "fake line numbers", and "special target for profit" and other illegal events, not only the parties to the transaction have been on the court, even the election nominations have been exchanged, making the "three middle" transactions not only become The "Rashomon", which has its own words, also underscores the suspected of making "national treasury" as their  "party treasury" and furthermore, making "party treasury" as their "private treasury" in the process of "Ill-gotten Party Assets."


According to the party property report published by the KMT on August 23 last year, when the KMT was officially registered as a corporate legal person in 1994, the net party property value was 38.5 billion yuan. In March 2000, the net production value of the party was increased to 80.8 billion yuan from the transfer of the former chairman to the former chairman, and was reduced to 31.1 billion yuan in August 2005 when the former chairman took office. According to the latest information, until July 15, this year It was further reduced to 25.457 billion yuan. In just 7 years, the net output of the KMT has changed from 80.8 billion yuan to 25.4 billion yuan. Where did the short 55.4 billion yuan go and who's pocket?


The handling of the party's property by the KMT is definitely not the domestic affair of the "KMT". It is even more impossible for a few people to cover the sky with their own hand, thinking that if the money is spent, and the party's property is used up and wiped out, and the matter will be resolved. Whether it involves corruption or breach of trust, sacrifice in food, benefits transmission, and other illegal matters, and whether the relevant parties bear legal responsibility, or even criminal responsibility, must be clearly identified. We support anti-corruption and we also demand that the KMT give a good explanation of its "disappeared party property" to Taiwan society and the people of Taiwan.


On September 13, 2002, the Executive Yuan House passed the "Regulations on Disposal of Improperly Acquired Property by Political Parties (Draft)" for consideration by the Legislative Yuan. Due to the strong opposition of the opposition parties of the "China Kuomintang" joint party. The ruling party had to start a referendum on “improving the wrong party property” last year. At present, it has completed two stages of signing according to law, and starting from the 4th of this month, the authorities will review the signing of the referendum and finish the job within 45 days. In January next year, through the next legislative election, justice and justice can be extended through direct civil rights and referendums, and the firm will and determination of the people of Taiwan to pursue freedom, democracy, human rights, and justice can be actively demonstrated. But then again, the whole point is still there is no way to obtain a parliamentary majority, and I very much agree with the statement made by today's distinguished guest, former East German Prime Minister His Excellency Demetie: The key is still in the parliament, only by obtaining a parliamentary majority Passing the necessary relevant bills remains key.


Finally, I would like to thank once again the "Taiwan Think Tank" for the intention of hosting this time-honored seminar, and I wish today's conference a complete success. All the guests, advanced and friends present are healthy and good luck.