Name of politician: Ma Ying-jeou
Title of Speech: Start with grateful，begin with modest-the speech after winning 2008 presidential election
Date of Speech: 22/03/2008
Category: Famous speech 
Source：http://news.ifeng.com/special/tw2008/news/200803/0322_2965_455138.shtml 


Chinese Title of the speech: 从感恩出发从谦卑做起
Location: 胜选演讲
Time: 22/03/2008
Words: 2423


Body of the speech: 




各位立法委员，各位民意代表，各位竞选总部的同仁，我们亲民党的宋主席，在现场以及电视机旁的“全国”民众，大家晚安，大家好！


现在我向大家报告，刚才开票结果统计，我与萧万长先生得票已经超过一半，当选“中华民国”第十二任的“总统”、“副总统”。我要强调的是，这次的选举结果不是我们马萧个人的胜利，也不是国民党一个党的胜利，这是全体台湾人民的胜利，大家说对不对？这次台湾所有希望求新求变、希望开放改革、希望和谐向前行的人民共同的胜利对不对？


更重要的是，我们完成了台湾历史上第四次的公民直接“总统”选举，在平和的情况下落幕，代表了我们民主政治又向前迈进了一步，大家说对不对？


从选举的结果可以看得出来，台湾的人民心声是什么，台湾人民希望政府清廉，不要贪腐，台湾人民政治安定，不要内斗，台湾人民希望和谐，不要撕裂，台湾人民希望两岸和平，不要战争，大家说对不对？过去这一年，我从南到北，访问了260多个乡镇市，接触到50万以上的民众，我深刻感觉到，我们台湾人的要求其实并不多，我们只希望能够过安定和平的日子，我们生活要过的好，而且最重要的我们要能够维持台湾之所以成为台湾的核心价值，就是善良、坚韧、包容、刻苦，对不对？


这八年来，越来越多的台湾人民对政治感到厌烦，对口水战感到痛恨，但是人民却共同希望王建民能够胜投，能够希望中华队能够取得奥运参赛权，台湾人民不分蓝绿都是一样的，对不对？


台湾人民并不希望大富大贵，但是他们有权利要求不要过苦日子。对不对？台湾已经是个民主社会，人民之间政治的看法或许并不相同，彼此也会批评，但是我相信每个人都可以同意的是，我们不能够在原地踏步，在内耗空转下去了。所以我们认为，只有改变，台湾才有希望，只有改变，人民才有机会，对不对？


所以我向大家报告，人民的声音我们听见了，我们现在的感觉，虽然是胜选，我们高兴，但是更重要的，我们心里面了解到，这是一个重大责任的承担，我们必须要把人民的付托变成政策、变成施政，才能回报大家对我们的支持，大家说对不对？


1月12日我们立法院的选举，国民党拿到三分之二的席次，现在“总统”大选我们又能够过半，这代表着人民支持我们，完全执政、完全负责的看法，大家说对不对？


这代表着萧院长跟我出来参选，为的不是个人和家庭的荣华富贵，我们知道我们的肩上的重担不是千斤而是万斤，请各位放心，我们就任后一定以最快的速度把我们提出来“中央”的政见变成预算，最终落实，最终考核，一定要贯彻到底，好不好？


所以选举的结束只是承担的开始，选举的结束也是改变的开始，我再强调一遍，唯有改变台湾才有希望，唯有改变，人民才有机会。我要在这里向我们的竞争对手说几句话，谢长廷先生，苏贞昌先生，他们的竞选团队和支持者，我也要向他们致意，这次选举，大家当然有许多的批评，甚至有许多的火花，但是我们从来不敢忽视民进党在过去几十年当中对于台湾民主、台湾进步的贡献，不论我们的看法有什么不同，但是我们至少共同完成了台湾史上第四次的“总统”直选，让“总统”选举能够在基本上平和的情况下落幕，我们对这次的选举都做出我们应该有的努力，也完成了台湾民主政治史上一个重要的里程碑，我觉得不论输赢如何，我们应该同感骄傲，民主自由是台湾最重要的资产，我们生活在其中，平常也许感受不到，但是一定关键时刻，民主自由所展现的力量会非常大，这是台湾最大的资产，也是台湾最迷人的资产。


民主、自由是我们台湾最核心的价值，萧院长跟我在未来都愿意以我们最大的力量和生命捍卫他，好不好。我也要在这里承诺，我们5月20日执政后，一定努力争取民进党以及其他在野党派合作与支持，共同为台湾未来打拼。我也要承诺，谢先生提出19项的重要政见，我们也会若干纳入我们施政的重要参考。我认为倾听人民的声音，尊重在野党和媒体，不干预独立机关的运作和扶持社会中间的力量，是推动阳光政治、维护多元制衡以及让台湾继续在民主的大道上前进的重要步骤，我保证上任后，一定身体力行。


各位亲爱的乡亲，选举只是一时的，但是人民的福祉、社会的安定、“国家”的前途却是永久的，选举只是决定这四年内由谁来管理这个政府，我们不必过度的看重，而是应该想到选举的结束就是执政的开始，而选举当中，它的本质是政治性的，会冲突、对立，但是执政后是行政性的，我们不会因为有500多万人没有投票给我我们就不照顾他，他们都是我们的人民，大家都是人民，我们一定会一视同仁，不分党派的照顾。


我要在这里向大家保证，执政后的国民党，会从感恩出发，从谦卑做起，我们会努力的倾听人民的心声，我们在野八年，非常感受到人民对现状的痛苦和无奈，我们会把他们的心声当成是我们执政最主要的依据，我们会勇敢的检讨、反省，我们会努力的来改革，来把我们社会改的更好。所有的政策我们一定会贯彻到底。


萧院长跟我，未来执政之后一定努力，能够以身作则。我们要让所有的孩子们能够看到一些正面的示范，如果让孩子们感觉到他不会跟我们学坏，这才是政治人物应该做的正面示范。大家说对不对？


一个民主国家，政党执政、下野，上上下下是家常便饭，其实不必过度的解读，和平竞争、和平轮替，将来一定是政党政治的常态，在这里我要感谢支持我的民众，支持我的朋友们，你们给我们一个机会，让台湾能够大步向前迈进，我和萧院长一定尽快来达到各位的期待。特别感谢各地竞选总部的干部，因为你们到处拜票拉票，才让我们有今天的成果。我也要感谢国民党吴主席以及所有党部同仁，你们的支持是我们成功重要的支柱。我也要感谢所有警察同仁、维安人员以及“国安”系统人员，因为你们把安全工作做的很好，让选举在非常激情气氛下和平落幕。


各位乡亲，各位女士、先生，选举已经告一段落，我们把激情收起来，卷起袖子要推动建设，台湾不能再等待，台湾不能再蹉跎，台湾不能再犹豫，台湾必须要进步。


我相信，今天是台湾进步改革的开始，未来的台湾我相信一定是越来越旺，大家说对不对。各位乡亲父老，各位我亲爱的台湾人民，是不是请各位再一次和我一起来喊台湾向前行，台湾一定赢。


Google Translate:


Dear legislators, public opinion representatives, colleagues running for headquarters, Chairman Song of the People ’s Democratic Party, and the “national” people at the scene and next to the television, good night, everyone!


Now I report to you that the statistics of the results of the invoicing just now show that Mr. Xiao Wanchang and I have obtained more than half of the votes and were elected as the "President" and "Vice President" of the 12th term of the "Republic of China". I want to emphasize that the result of this election is not our personal victory for me and my partner, nor the victory of the Kuomintang party. This is the victory of the entire Taiwanese people. Is that right? Is this the common victory of all the people in Taiwan who want to seek new changes, open reforms, and move forward in harmony?


More importantly, we have completed the fourth direct "presidential" election of citizens in the history of Taiwan. The peaceful end of the election represents another step forward in our democratic politics. Is that right?


From the results of the election, we can see what the people ’s voice in Taiwan is. The people of Taiwan want the government to be clean, not to be corrupt, the people of Taiwan to be politically stable, not to fight, the people of Taiwan to be harmonious, not torn, and the people of Taiwan to want peace on both sides of the strait, not war. Is that right? In the past year, I visited more than 260 towns and cities from south to north, and reached more than 500,000 people. I deeply felt that the requirements of our Taiwanese people are actually not much. We just hope that we can live in peace and stability. Life, we have to live well, and most importantly, we must be able to maintain the core values ​​of Taiwan, that is, kindness, tenacity, tolerance, hard work, right?


Over the past eight years, more and more Taiwanese people are tired of politics and hate water wars, but the people all hope that Wang Jianmin can win the vote and the Chinese team can get the right to participate in the Olympics. This common wish is the same, no matter you are from Pan-Blue Coalition or the Pan-Green Coalition, is that right?


The people of Taiwan do not want to be rich and rich, but they have the right to ask not to live a hard life. right? Taiwan is already a democratic society. The political views of the people may not be the same and they will criticize each other, but I believe that everyone can agree that we cannot move on the ground and spend time inside. Therefore, we believe that only change can bring hope to Taiwan, and only change can give people a chance, right?


So I report to you that we have heard the voice of the people. We now feel that although it is a victory, we are happy, but more importantly, we have learned in our hearts that this is a commitment of great responsibility. We must take the people Only by turning into a policy and a policy can we repay your support for us. Are you right?


In the Legislative Yuan election on January 12, the Kuomintang won two thirds of the seats, and now we can get more than half of the "Presidential" election. This represents the people's support for us, a view of complete governance and full responsibility. Are you right?


This means that Dean Xiao came out with me to run for election, not for the glory and wealth of individuals and families. We know that the burden on our shoulders is not a jin, but a jin. Please rest assured that we must be the fastest after taking office Turn the political opinions we put forward in the "central government" into budgets, and finally implement them. The final assessment must be carried out to the end, okay?


Therefore, the end of the election is only the beginning of commitment. The end of the election is also the beginning of change. I stress once again that only change in Taiwan can have hope, and only change can give people a chance. I would like to say a few words to our competitors here, Mr. Frank Hsieh, Mr. Su Tseng-chang, their campaign team and supporters, and I would also like to pay tribute to them. Of course, there are many criticisms and even many of them in this election. Sparks, but we never dare to ignore the DPP ’s contribution to Taiwan ’s democracy and progress in the past few decades, no matter what our views are, but we have at least jointly completed the fourth “Presidential” direct election in Taiwan ’s history Let the "presidential" election end in a basically peaceful situation. We have made our due efforts for this election and also completed an important milestone in the history of Taiwan ’s democratic politics. I think that no matter what we win or lose, we should share our pride. Democracy and freedom are the most important assets of Taiwan. We may not be able to feel them when we live in it, but at certain critical moments, the power of democracy and freedom will be very great. This is Taiwan ’s largest asset and Taiwan ’s most charming. asset.


Democracy and freedom are the core values ​​of our Taiwan. Dean Xiao and I are willing to defend him with our greatest strength and life in the future, OK? I also want to promise here that after taking office on May 20, we will work hard to win the cooperation and support of the DPP and other opposition parties to work together for the future of Taiwan. I also want to promise that Mr. Xie put forward 19 important political opinions, and we will also include some important references for our governance. I think listening to the people, respecting opposition parties and the media, not interfering with the operation of independent institutions and supporting the forces in society is an important step to promote sunny politics, maintain pluralistic checks and balances, and keep Taiwan on the road to democracy. I promise this taking office and I will do it by myself.


Dear folks, the election is only temporary, but the well-being of the people, the stability of society, and the future of the "state" are permanent. The election is only to decide who will run this government in these four years. It should be thought that the end of the election is the beginning of governing, and in the election, its essence is political, conflict and opposition, but after the administration is administrative, we will not because more than 5 million people did not vote for us so we wouldn’t take care of them after taking office. They are all our people, and everyone is a people. We will treat them equally, regardless of party.


I want to assure everyone here that after the ruling Kuomintang will start from gratitude and start from humility, we will work hard to listen to the voice of the people. We have felt the pain and helplessness of the people for the status quo for eight years in the wild. We will Regarding their aspirations as the most important basis for our administration, we will bravely review and reflect, and we will work hard to reform and make our society better. We will definitely implement all policies.


Dean Xiao told me that he will work hard and be able to lead by example after taking office in the future. We need to allow all children to see some positive demonstrations. If the children feel that he will not learn from us, this is the positive demonstration that politicians should do. Everyone is right?


In a democratic country, political parties are sometimes in power, but sometimes not. It’s normal to lose or win the election. In fact, there is no need to think too much about it. Peaceful competition and peaceful rotation will always be the normal state of party politics. Here I want to thank the people who support me and support my friends We, you give us an opportunity to make great strides forward in Taiwan. Dean Xiao and I must come to meet your expectations as soon as possible. Special thanks to the cadres who have run for headquarters in various places, because you have paid attention to canvassing and canvassing, so that we have today's results. I also want to thank Chairman Wu of the Kuomintang and all my colleagues in the Party Department. Your support is an important pillar of our success. I would also like to thank all my police colleagues, security personnel, and members of the "National Security" system, because you have done a good job in security and let the elections come to a peaceful end in a very passionate atmosphere.


Dear folks, ladies and gentlemen, the election has come to an end. We put away our passion, rolled up our sleeves to promote construction, Taiwan can no longer wait, Taiwan can no longer hold back, Taiwan can no longer hesitate, and Taiwan must make progress.


I believe that today is the beginning of Taiwan's progressive reform. I believe that Taiwan will become more and more prosperous in the future. Everyone is right. Dear fellow elders, my dear Taiwanese people, would you please join me again to call Taiwan forward, Taiwan will win.