Name of politician: Ma Ying-jeou
Title of Speech: Opening remarks by President Ma Ying-jeou at his meeting with mainland Chinese leader Xi Jinping in Singapore
Date of Speech: 07/11/2015
Category: Famous speech


Chinese Title of the speech: 總統出席「兩岸領導人會面」
Time: 中華民國104年11月07日
Words: 1440


Body of the speech: 


  習先生，大陸與臺灣代表團的各位女士、先生，以及在場的媒體朋友們，大家午安，大家好！


  今天，我跟習先生分別以臺灣與大陸領導人的身分，穿越66年的時空，伸手相握，握著兩岸的過去與未來，也握著中華民族振興的希望，深具歷史意義。
22年前，也就是1993年的4月，臺灣海基會董事長辜振甫先生與大陸海協會會長汪道涵先生在新加坡會面，簽訂了4個協議，為兩岸制度化協商打下了基礎。12年前，也就是2003年的10月，我在「東亞經濟高峰會」上，跟新加坡建國總理李光耀資政對談。當時我們都認為：「兩岸的發展，要以人民的利益做為依歸」。


此刻，我跟習先生相對而坐，共聚一堂，在我們背後的，是兩岸分隔超過一甲子的歷史；在我們眼前的，是這幾年來，雙方致力「以對話取代對立、以和解替代衝突」的成果；在我們手上的，是永續和平與繁榮的目標。此時此刻，海峽兩岸正大聲向全世界宣示鞏固臺海和平的決心，以及促進區域和平的訊息。


這66年來，兩岸在不同的體制下發展，能夠從軍事對抗轉為合作交流，絕非朝夕之功。7年多來，兩岸簽訂了23項協議，創造了4萬多學生交流、每年800萬旅客往來與1700多億美元貿易的空前榮景。這些巨大改變的基礎，都在於「和平」。


  歷史為兩岸留下了錯綜複雜的世代課題，這正是《尚書》所說的「非知之艱，行之惟艱」。對於各自堅持的敏感議題，需要雙方正視現實，以智慧、耐心與誠意務實處理。但是，我們依然能夠努力在雙方這些年來建構的「制度性協商」之下，達成了兩岸和解與合作，推動了永續和平與繁榮，而這也是兩岸及國際社會所共同期待的。


  今天，我願提出維繫兩岸和平繁榮現狀的五點主張：


  第一、鞏固「九二共識」，維持和平現狀。海峽兩岸在1992年11月就「一個中國」原則達成的共識，簡稱「九二共識」。九二共識是兩岸推動和平發展的共同政治基礎，正是因為雙方共同尊重九二共識，過去七年半來，我們才能獲致包括達成23項協議在內的豐碩成果與和平榮景，讓兩岸關係處於66年來最和平穩定的狀態。這個部分，等一下在會談的時候，我會再做進一步的說明。
  第二、降低敵對狀態，和平處理爭端。兩岸目前已不再處於過去的衝突對立，雙方應該持續降低敵對狀態，並以和平方式解決爭端。
  第三、擴大兩岸交流，增進互利雙贏。目前兩岸尚未結案的議題，例如貨貿協議、兩會互設機構、與陸客中轉等，應該儘速處理，以創造兩岸雙贏。
  第四、設置兩岸熱線，處理急要問題。兩岸目前在海基會、海協會首長之間，與陸委會、國臺辦副首長之間，都已經設有聯繫的機制。今後應該在陸委會、國臺辦首長之間設立熱線，以處理緊急與重要的問題。
  第五、兩岸共同合作，致力振興中華。兩岸人民同屬中華民族、都是炎黃子孫，應該互助合作，致力振興中華。


  這五點主張不是為了一己之私、單方之利，而是為了後代子孫的幸福。我誠摯地希望，雙方都應該重視人民所珍惜的價值與生活方式，維護兩岸和平，以中華文化蘊涵的智慧，確保兩岸互利雙贏。
  習先生，當前的兩岸關係，已經是1949年以來最為和平穩定的階段。這幾年，我常常在臺灣的大學校園中，看到兩岸學生一起討論、一起運動、一起演奏、一起歡笑的畫面。那種自然的水乳交融，往往讓我們既欣慰，又感動。他們有熱情、有創意；但是他們沒有仇恨，沒有包袱；他們能夠在人生較早的階段建立友誼，一定可以為兩岸永續和平打下更為堅實的基礎。我們要好好珍惜、擴大這個基礎。
  北宋大儒張橫渠主張「為天地立心，為生民立命，為往聖繼絕學，為萬世開太平」。習先生，為了兩岸人民，讓我們一起努力、「為生民立命，為萬世開太平」，為中華民族開創更加和平燦爛的未來。
謝謝大家！


Official Translation:


https://english.president.gov.tw/NEWS/4779


Today Mr. Xi and I, as leaders of mainland China and Taiwan, respectively, have moved on from the past 66 years, reaching out to share this handshake, to hold the past, embrace the future, and uphold the aspirations for prosperity of the people on both sides of the Taiwan Strait. This carries historic significance.


Twenty-two years ago, in April 1993, Mr. Koo Chen-fu (辜振甫), chairman of Taiwan’s Straits Exchange Foundation, and Mr. Wang Daohan (汪道涵), chairman of mainland China’s Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits, met in Singapore. Four agreements were signed, laying the groundwork for institutionalized cross-strait consultations. Twelve years ago, in October 2003, I met with the founding Prime Minister and Senior Advisor of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew at the East Asia Economic Summit. We both believed then that cross-strait developments must be based on the interests of the people.


At this moment, Mr. Xi and I are sitting across from each other, gathered together in one room. Behind us is the historical backdrop of six decades of separate governance on the two sides of the Taiwan Strait. Before us lie the accomplishments that the two sides have achieved in the past few years through our commitment to replacing antagonism with dialogue and confrontation with rapprochement. We hold in our hands the future objective of sustainable peace and prosperity. At this time, the two sides of the Taiwan Strait are proclaiming loudly and clearly to the rest of the world our determination to consolidate peace in the Taiwan Strait and the message that we will promote peace in the region.


Over the past 66 years, the two sides of the Taiwan Strait have developed under different systems. That we have been able to shift from military confrontation to cooperative exchanges is certainly not an overnight achievement. Over the past seven-plus years, the two sides have concluded 23 agreements, and have created over 40,000 student exchanges, 8 million annual cross-strait visits, and US$170 billion in two-way trade. The foundation for these momentous changes is peace.


History has bequeathed the two sides of the Taiwan Strait an epochal and convoluted issue that, as Shang Shu (The Book of Documents, 尚書) says, is easy to understand but difficult to resolve. Sensitive issues on which each side maintains a firm position must be faced squarely and pragmatically, and handled with wisdom, patience, and good will by both sides. In the meantime, we can devote continued effort, through institutionalized consultations that we have facilitated over recent years, to building rapprochement and cooperation, and to promoting sustainable peace and prosperity. This is a common aspiration of the two sides of the Taiwan Strait as well as the international community.


Today I wish to put forth five points for maintaining the status quo of peace and prosperity in the Taiwan Strait.


First, consolidation of the 1992 Consensus and the maintenance of peace. The two sides of the Taiwan Strait arrived at the 1992 Consensus of “one China, respective interpretations” in November 1992. This consensus provides the common political basis for the two sides to promote peaceful development. It is because the two sides share a common respect for this consensus that, over the past seven and a half years, we have reaped many rewards and ensured peace and prosperity—which includes the conclusion of 23 agreements—leading to the most peaceful and stable cross-strait relations in 66 years. I will elaborate on this point later in our meeting.


Second, reduction of hostility and peaceful handling of disputes. The two sides are no longer in a state of confrontation. Both sides should continue to reduce hostility and resolve disputes in a peaceful manner.


Third, expansion of cross-strait exchanges and mutual benefits. Efforts should be stepped up to resolve issues such as a trade-in-goods agreement, reciprocal establishment of representative offices, and flight transfers in Taiwan for mainland Chinese travelers, so as to create a win-win situation for both sides.


Fourth, establishment of a cross-strait hotline to handle important or urgent matters. A liaison mechanism is already in place between the heads of the Straits Exchange Foundation and the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits, as well as between the deputy heads of the Mainland Affairs Council and the Taiwan Affairs Office. A hotline between the heads of the MAC and the TAO should be set up to deal with important or urgent issues.


Fifth, joint cooperation for cross-strait prosperity. The people of both sides are Chinese, descendants of the emperors Yan and Huang. The two sides should cooperate to promote cross-strait prosperity.


These five points are not aimed at achieving selfish goals or unilateral gains, but a better future for coming generations. Both sides should accord great importance to the values and way of life that our people cherish, maintain cross-strait peace, and ensure mutual benefits and success for both sides with the wisdom embedded in Chinese culture.


Cross-strait relations are at their most peaceful and stable since 1949. In the past few years, I have often seen students from the two sides talking, taking part in sports, playing music, and enjoying themselves together on university campuses around Taiwan. This natural gathering of students is very touching. They show passion and creativity, with no enmity or historical burden. They are able to build friendships at an early stage of life; this will certainly cement a strong foundation for sustainable cross-strait peace. We must cherish and expand on this foundation.


As Northern Song dynasty scholar Zhang Heng-qu (張橫渠, 1020-1077) advised: Devote your heart to heaven and earth, devote your life to the people, uphold the wisdom of past sages, create peace for generations to come. For the people of both sides of the Taiwan Strait, let us work together, devote our lives to our people, create peace for generations to come, and open a new chapter of peace and a glorious future.