Name of politician: Chen Shui-bian
Title of Speech: Candidate Chen’s speeches on 2004 presidential election TV debate 
Date of Speech: 14/02/2004
Category: Campaign speech


Chinese Title of the speech: 陈水扁2004总统选举电视辩论申论+结论
Time: 中華民國93年02月14日
words: 3402


Statement：
吴董事长、各位提问人，可敬的连先生，各位嘉宾，亲爱的国人同胞，大家午安。
今天是历史性的一天，也是我们台湾民主历史的第1次，更是华人社会的第1次。其实在4年前原本就有这样的机会，可是当时的连先生拒绝了，让我们又等了4年。不过我们也非常感谢主办单位以及社会舆论的促成，才让我们在今天又写下历史。
今天同时也是情人节，阿扁在此要祝福普天下的情人，包括阿扁与阿珍这样的旧情人，以及一四代的新恋人，都能够珍惜所有，真爱长久。
在情人节很多人都喜欢送玫瑰花，也让阿扁想起小王子里边的故事。小王子说，我对我的玫瑰花有责任。这句话最让阿扁感动，因为作为一个国家的领导人，对这一块土地有责任，对2300万的台湾人民及后代的子孙更有责任。
顾台湾，拼未来，顾今民，拼幸福，就是阿扁的责任。结合人民的力量，相信台湾，坚持改革就是阿扁的责任。拼经济，大改革，谋台湾成为一个正常、完整、伟大又美丽的民主国家，也是阿扁的责任。台北101大楼，这是现今世界的最高大楼。阿扁非常高兴在市长的时代，曾经为它打下一些基础。国家的建设跟盖大楼其实都是一样的，基础一定要稳固，才能够盖得高，站得稳。就像我们有一句客家的谚语，是这样讲的：主要酒穷站得稳，不怕东南西北风。我觉得这句话非常的有意思，但是过去的50年挺清楚的，在国民党政府的时代，由于黑金的影响，由于党国的部分，由于司法的不公，不断的逮捕是我们国家的基础，动摇我们国家的根本。阿扁觉得非常的遗憾。
我们再想看看，在4年前，如果没有政党轮替，我们政党可能退出军队吗？今天的军队国家化能够这么样的落实吗？如果没有政党轮替，刘冠军会爆发吗？今天有可能把国安的密帐全部缴过来充实国库吗？一样的，如果没有政党轮替，今天这一些呼风唤雨的黑金人士怎么可能会跑到国外去？很可能今天站在连先生、宋先生身边的又是伍澤元，梁柏薰、陳由豪或者朱婉清等人。我们真的没办法想象。
我们希望能够来这一个相信台湾，来这一个坚持改革。但是有些人却是嘴巴讲一套，实地做一套。也就是说我们把改革，当做是我们的信仰，但是有人把它当作是这一个习惯，我们真的非常的不习惯。就像我们都了解到这一些特权超弹以及掏空银行的案件，大概就有这一个两兆5000亿之多。在阿扁的努力之下，这三四年来我们光是打消呆账，就超过了一兆2000亿。
今天在野党不帮忙也罢，竟然还扯后腿。包括RTC这样的一个重建基金的法案，到目前为止还没办法通过。其实这一个反对改革的案例实在太多了，包括“阳光三法”也反对，包括立法院席次要减半也反对，当然也包括这一个政党不当取得财产的条例也反对，包括司改的方案也反对。我们真的没办法想象，为什么要反对？反对改革怎么样能够拼经济？其实我也知道，我们大家也知道说，目前的状况之下，我们已经要建立今民对国家、对社会的信心。不能说一个人，他这样没有工作的时候，那你去那里，你不会安慰，也不会鼓励，你竟然说，啊，你实在有够可怜，啊你是有够惨的，你这样要怎么办，那你前途都已经没有了，那你日子是要怎么样过呢？结果两个人抱在一起还大骂人都是阿扁太笨。但是我觉得不可以这样，我们应该要鼓励他说，眼泪要擦干，应该要坚强自己，不要忘记，还有机会，只要努力，重新出发，一定会成功。我相信这个就是阿扁跟连先生最大的人格特质的不同。
阿扁对一句话，印象非常的深刻。艰困中成长的人有最这一个美好的理想。阿扁相信这句话，就是我们台湾的精神。台湾知足的精神，在有限的条件里边，在最恶劣的环境之下，我们要开创无限的最大可能。
所以我们相信台湾，坚持改革，我们一定做得到，请支持。
台湾第一，改革第一，而且这一个有主见、有主张，而且抗压性最强的，我们水莲再配一定可以连任成功，谢谢！


Conclusion：
主持人，可敬的连先生，各位嘉宾，各位提问人，亲爱的国人同胞，非常感谢有这么好的机会。其实，我更要感谢让我有说明的机会。
阿扁绝对不是一个善变的人，像阿扁的发型十年永远不变。虽然我太太受伤坐轮椅，我爱她也不变。我不会打她。我相信如果真的改变了，让黑金回来，这是大家所愿意的吗？
让伍澤元回來，讓朱婉清回來，讓陳由豪回來，讓回來，大家願意嗎？回來以後沒事，大家願意嗎？剛才我們連先生特別提到人格的特質。當然，兩個人的人格的特質完全不一樣。我是這一種出生的人，但是我非常地進取，非常地積極，我奮鬥不懈。所以我要跟全國的同胞大家共同勉勵，因為每一個人都是台灣之子。我們要相信自己，要相信台灣，我們不要放棄，最後一定會成功。環境再困難，挫折不要怕，不要哭，也不要跪，我認為這一些都是非常重要的，不要遇事退縮。沒有主張，沒有主見。其實我講沒有主張，沒有主見，不是阿扁的創建，而是你的對手在四年前他就這樣講，說連先生是一個沒有主張，沒有主見的人，沒有資格做國家的領導。
我們人格特質另外一個不一樣的地方是，阿扁永遠相信，人民最大，不是政黨最大。所以你說要改變，再讓以黨嶺政，黨國不分，特別過去幾十年所霸佔的國家、人民的財產沒辦法處理，這是人民所願意的嗎？
所以，也因為人民最大，所以我們願意把權力交給人民。包括過去爭取國會全面改選，爭取總統直接民選，包括我們即將舉行的公民投票。因為我們相信人民是最大的，我們相信人民的智慧跟能力。
剛才連先生特別提到，要擱置國家的主權。這個就是最危險的地方。這也是為什麼几年来，阿扁这么样的坚持。这些事情可以搁置，但是主权绝对不能够搁置，主权绝对要坚持，要坚持台湾是一个主权独立的国家。依照我们现行的宪法，我们的国号叫中华民国。我们必须要维持目前的现状。我们不希望看到目前台湾主权的现状受到任何的改变，包括受到任何武力的威胁。所以我真的没办法同意连先生刚才说要搁置台湾的主权。这才是2300万台湾人民最不放心的地方。
320公民投票，这是普世价值。我们着的要以办喜事的心情，来迎接公民投票那一个伟大日子的到来。当全世界有那么多的国家、地区与公民可以享受公投的基本权利的时候，我们要感谢天，感谢地。2300万的台湾人民终于拥有公投的权利。我们可以守护台湾，可以守护我们的土地，可以守护51：49；可以守护我们的子孙，可以守护我们的幸福。所以我希望连先生，真的你不要阻挡。你可以不同意，但是你不要阻挡。320挺多人要搭游览车，希望游览车可以让我们一些要去的人可以坐的到。不要阻挡，否则到时候历史自会有公断。
几年来，阿扁频频地下乡，最远的地方东瀛，乌丘，太平岛阿扁都去过。高山的基地：松山，乐山以及丹山阿扁都去过。那是我们的国家，这是我们心爱的土地。有我们最伟大的人民。
阿扁真的非常感谢，不管阿扁到哪里，到军中，到偏远的山区跟哪边，跟这些岛农、渔民，这些村妇走过来，握住阿扁的手，那些人都已经90岁了，他又在那边等3个小时。他只要阿扁说一句话，阿扁，你要坚持哦，然后一个80几岁的老奶奶，她坐轮椅过来，她说，哎，阿扁，你不能输，一定要赢哦，台湾都靠你了。阿扁，我真的非常的感动。有一次，有一位老农夫走过来，他说，他没心情去干活。因为他非常担心，他跟我讲，他说：阿扁啊，当选哦，不可以落选哦。因为如果你落选的话，那个蓝色的旗，天天说天天蓝，每都是好天，那不就没下雨，我们这些干农活的要怎么办？那肯定不能够天天天蓝啊，也要有好天气，也要下雨呀，这是个自然的法则。让我很敬佩，连这样干农活的人都有这样的观念。那国家也一样啊，不可能说每天都是好天气，也是会下雨呀，就像是下海的渔民一样，下雨的时候他要补破网，好天气的时候他要出海去抓鱼。政府也一样，这几年以来，我也补了很多破网，全都是你留下来的。国民党留下来的这些破网都要我来补。我还要出海抓鱼呢，还要给大家有个大丰收，还有一个很好的收入，让大家能够过得更好，这就是几年来我的心情的写照。也是我的政府的团队，大家上上下下，大家共同努力的一个结果。我们应该给大家更多鼓励和肯定的掌声，否则对阿扁的团队是非常不公平的。那么多的公务员，那么多的国人同胞，不分彼此，大家这么样的打拼，应该给他更多支持、鼓励、跟感谢的掌声。
非常感谢今天主办单位，让我们这么好的机会。感谢我们提问人，更感谢大家热情的参与。320只有一个选择，那就是要继续支持，台湾第一，改革第一，我们第一号，第一好，水莲再配，一定可以连任成功。
特别人格的特质，必须要选择一个有主张，有主见人。不要选一个遇事退缩，变来变去的人，特别不能选一个对一个国家的主权可以搁置，不敢坚持的人。我希望大家320欢欢喜喜来投票，来公投，相信台湾，再写历史。谢谢大家。


Google Translate：


Chairman Wu, questioners, respectable Mr. Lian, distinguished guests, dear fellow Chinese, good afternoon.
Today is a historic day, the first time in our democratic history in Taiwan, and the first time in Chinese society. Actually, such an opportunity originally existed 4 years ago, but Mr. Lien at the time rejected it and let us wait another 4 years. However, we are also very grateful to the organizer and the public opinion for making it possible for us to write history again today.
Today is also Valentine's Day. Here, I would like to bless all the lovers in the world, including old lover like me and my wife, as well as new lovers of one or four generations, can cherish everything and love for a long time.
Many people like to send roses on Valentine's Day, which reminds me of the story of the little prince. The little prince said, I am responsible for my roses. This sentence moved me most, because as a leader of a country, he is responsible for this land, and he is even more responsible for the 23 million Taiwanese people and future generations.
It is A my responsibility to take care of Taiwan, fight for the future, and care for today's people. Combining the strength of the people, believing in Taiwan and adhering to reform is my responsibility. It is also my responsibility to fight for the economy and carry out major reforms to make Taiwan a normal, complete, great, and beautiful democracy. Taipei 101 Building, which is the tallest building in the world today. I am very glad that in the era of the mayor, he laid some foundation for it. The construction of a country is actually the same as building a building. The foundation must be stable to build it high and stand firmly. Just like we have a Hakka proverb, it goes like this: The main wine poor stands firmly and is not afraid of the northwest, southwest wind. I think this sentence is very interesting, but the past 50 years are quite clear. In the era of the Kuomintang government, due to the influence of the black gold, the system of the party state and judicial injustice, they continuously shook the foundation of our country and destroyed the essence of the country. I felt very sorry.
Let's look at it again. If there were no party rotations 4 years ago, could the army be independent from the party? Can the nationalization of the military today be so implemented? If there is no party rotation, will the black-gold case of Liu Guanjun break out? Is it possible to use all the secrete “national security accounts” to enrich our treasury ? Similarly, if there is no rotation of political parties, how could these powerful and privileged people who owned a lot of “black gold” fled abroad? It is likely that Mr. Wu Zeyuan, Mr. Liang Baixun, Mr. Chen Youhao, or Mr. Zhu Wanqing are standing next to Mr. Lien and Mr. Soong today. We really can't imagine.
We hope to come to this one to believe in Taiwan and to this one to persist in reform. But some people talk about it in one mouth and do it in the field. In other words, we regard reform as our belief, but some people regard it as a habit, and we are really very unaccustomed to it. As we all know about these cases of privileged super bombs and hollowed out banks, there are probably as many as two trillion and 500 billion. Thanks to my efforts, over the past three or four years, we have eliminated more than one trillion and 200 billion yuan.
Opposition parties today don't even help, they are still hindering. Bills including a reconstruction fund like RTC have so far failed to pass. In fact, there are too many cases of opposition to reform, including the "Sunshine Three Acts", including the halving of the number of seats in the Legislative Yuan, and of course, the regulations on the improper acquisition of property by this political party. Against. We really can’t imagine, why should you object? How can opposition to reform fight the economy? In fact, I also know that we all know that under the current situation, we have to build the people's confidence in the country and society. Can’t say a person. When he doesn’t have a job like this, then you go there, you won’t be comforted or encouraged, and you say, ah, you ’re pathetic, ah, you ’re miserable, you want to What to do, then you have no future, so how do you live your life? As a result, the two people hugged and scolded each other accused that I was too stupid. But I don’t think so. We should encourage him to say that his tears should be wiped dry and he should be strong. Don’t forget that there is still a chance. As long as you work hard and start again, you will succeed. I believe this is the biggest difference between me and Mr. Lien.
I was very impressed by a sentence. People who grow up in hardship have the most beautiful dream. I believes this sentence is the spirit of Taiwan. In the spirit of contentment in Taiwan, in the limited conditions and under the harshest circumstances, we must create unlimited possibilities.
Therefore, we believe in Taiwan and insist on reform. We will definitely do it. Please support it.
Taiwan is the first, reform is the first, and this one has the opinion, the opinion, and the most stress-resistant.


Conclusion:
Moderator, respectable Mr. Lian, distinguished guests, questioners, dear fellow Chinese, thank you very much for having such a good opportunity. Actually, I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to explain.
I am definitely not a fickle person. Like my hairstyle has never change for ten years. Although my wife was injured in a wheelchair, I still love her. I won't hit her. I believe that if it really changes, let black gold come back. Is this what everyone wants?
Would you like Wu Zeyuan to come back, Zhu Wanqing to come back, Chen Youhao to come back? Will you like them be fine when they return? Mr. Lien mentioned the characteristics of personality just now. Of course, the personality traits of the two are completely different. I am a kind of person who born in low class, but I am very aggressive, very positive, and I work hard. Therefore, I would like to encourage everyone in the country, because everyone is a son of Taiwan. We have to believe in ourselves, we have to believe in Taiwan, we must not give up, and we will succeed in the end. No matter how difficult the environment is, don't be afraid of frustration, don't cry, and don't kneel. I think these are very important. No claims, no opinions. In fact, I said that there was no opinion, no opinion, not the creation of myself, but your opponent said it four years ago, saying that Mr. Lien is a person who has no opinion and no opinion, and is not qualified to be the leader of the country .
Another different of our personality traits is that I always believes that the people are supreme, not the political parties. So Mr. Lien, you said that you need to change. You want to let the party and the government, which employs party-state system, makes no different between the party and the government come back. You will also let the case of embezzle the property of the country and the people in the past few decades have no way to deal with. Is this what the people want?
Therefore, and because the people are the supreme, we are willing to give power to the people. These include the fight for a full re-election of Congress in the past and the direct election of the President, including our forthcoming referendum. Because we believe that the people are the supreme, we believe in their wisdom and capabilities.
Mr. Lien just mentioned in particular that the sovereignty of the country should be put on hold. This is the most dangerous place. This is why, for several years, I insisted so much. These things can be put on hold, but sovereignty can never be put on hold. Sovereignty must be upheld. Taiwan must be a sovereign and independent country. According to our current constitution, our country is called the Republic of China. We must maintain the status quo. We do not want to see any changes to the current status of Taiwan's sovereignty, including any threat of force. So I really can't agree with what Mr. Lian said just now that Taiwan's sovereignty should be shelved. This is where the 23 million people in Taiwan are most uneasy.
With 320 referendums, this is universal value. We want to welcome the great day of the referendum with a happy mood. When so many countries, regions and citizens in the world can enjoy the basic rights of the referendum, we have to thank the God and thank the lands. The 23 million people in Taiwan finally have the right to vote. We can protect Taiwan, we can protect our land, we can protect 51:49; we can protect our children and grandchildren, and we can protect our happiness. So I hope Mr. Lien, please don’t intervene. You can disagree with us, but you should not block. Many 320 people want to take a tour bus. I hope that the tour bus will allow some of us who want to go to take a ride. Don't block, otherwise there will be arbitration in history.
In the past few years, I have frequently travelled to underground villages. The farthest places have been Dongfang, Wuqiu, and Abian in Taiping Island. Alpine bases: Songshan, Leshan, and Danshan. I have all been there. That is our country, this is our beloved land where has our greatest people.
I am really grateful, no matter where I went, in the army, to the remote mountainous areas, or to these island farmers and fishermen, these village women come over and hold mys hand, and those people are already 90 At the age, he waited there for another 3 hours. He only needs to say a word,  Bian, you have to insist, and then an 80-year-old grandmother, she came in a wheelchair, she said, hey, Bian, you can’t lose, you must win, Taiwan depends on you Already. I am really touched. Once an old farmer came over and said that he had no mood to work. Because he was very worried, he told me, he said: Bian, you are elected, you can’t lose. Because if you lose the election, the blue flag says that every day is blue, every day is good, then it will not rain. What should we do if we are working in agriculture? It must not be blue every day. It also needs good weather and rain. This is a natural law. I admire it. Even people who do farm work like this have such a concept. The country is the same. It is impossible to say that it is good weather every day, and it rains, just like a fisherman who goes to the sea. When it rains, he has to repair the net. When the weather is good, he goes out to catch fish. The same is true for the government. Over the past few years, I have also made up a lot of broken nets, all of which your KMT left. I have to make up the broken nets left by the you. I have to go out to catch fish, and I have a big harvest for everyone, and a good income, so that everyone can have a better life. This is a portrait of my mood for several years. It is also a result of my government's team. We should give everyone more encouragement and affirmative applause, otherwise it will be very unfair to my team. With so many civil servants, so many compatriots of Chinese nationality, regardless of each other, we should give him more support, encouragement, and applause for his hard work.
Thank you very much for the organizer today, so we have such a good opportunity. Thanks to our questioners and thank you for your enthusiastic participation. There is only one option for 320, and that is to continue to support it. Taiwan is the first, reform is the first, we are the first, and the first is the best. Water lotus will be re-equipped, and we can definitely be re-elected successfully.
Special personality traits must choose a person who is assertive and opinionated. Don't choose a person who retreats when things go wrong, especially someone who can't hold on to the sovereignty of a country and dare not insist on it. I hope everyone 320 will rejoice in voting, come to the referendum, believe in Taiwan, and write history. thank you all.