Name of politician: Tsai Ing-wen
Title of Speech: President Tsai's video address to the 101st American Legion National Convention
Date of Speech: 28/08/2019
Category: Ribbon-cutting speech


Chinese Title of the speech: 總統在「美國退伍軍團協會」第101屆年度全國大會發表重要談話
Location: American Legion national headquarters in Indianapolis, Indiana, the USA
Time: 中華民國108年08月28日
Words: 2019 


Body of the speech: 


總統在「美國退伍軍團協會」第101屆年度全國大會發表重要談話
中華民國108年08月28日


蔡英文總統於美東時間8月27日（週二）下午（臺北時間8月28日凌晨）以錄影方式在「美國退伍軍團協會」（American Legion）第101屆年度全國大會上，發表重要談話。


本屆年會於印第安納州首府印第安納波利斯市的協會總部舉行，並邀請包括臺灣、英國、加拿大、韓國等國際友人致歡迎詞。與會貴賓尚包括美國國務卿龐培歐（Mike Pompeo）、「美國退伍軍團協會」總會長賴斯塔德（Brett P. Reistad）及我國軍退除役官兵輔導委員會副主任委員李文忠等。


 


總統錄影談話內容為：


美國退伍軍團協會是美國最大、聲望崇隆的退伍軍人組織，在各位面前發表演說，我深感榮幸。首先我要感謝布來特．賴斯塔德總會長的邀請，以及美國退伍軍團協會對臺灣的堅定支持，這份支持深植於我們對自由民主的共同信念。


美國退伍軍團協會守護全球自由整整一世紀，我雖然無法親自參與這個百年盛會，但願在此表達由衷祝賀之意。


過去一百年來，美軍為維護我們所珍視的普世價值奮戰、犧牲，這普世價值就是我們深信人生而自由，社會應該公平正義，權力應該操之於民。


從歐洲戰場到太平洋島嶼戰場，數百萬名美軍勇敢落實普世價值，每次經歷犧牲，世界就朝公平正義更趨前一步。


這些努力讓各國掙脫了壓迫的枷鎖，得以加入自由社會的行列。


去年12月，賴斯塔德總會長率領美國退伍軍團協會訪團來臺灣。我們談到確保亞太區域的自由，我們雙方都互蒙其利，期盼不再需要透過戰爭來解決歧見。我們也針對如何為榮民提供更優質的照護交換意見，好回饋他們對國家無私的奉獻。


我曾經跟賴斯塔德總會長提過，現在我要再說一次：確保亞太地區和平穩定的最好方式，就是維護臺美如今享有的堅實關係，共同堅定捍衛自由民主。


我們都非常清楚，人類歷史一直充斥著對控制權的爭奪戰，奪權花招也層出不窮。


如今，隔著臺灣海峽，我們面對一個利用新科技，不是為了創造更大福祉，而是在自由開放社會散播假消息挑撥分化的強權。


我已一再表示，只要我在位一天，臺灣絕對不會向壓力屈服，但這個挑戰我們無法獨自面對，勢須全球理念相同國家的支持。


幸運的是，由於美國退伍軍團協會等組織的支持，臺美關係得以更加堅實，而過去一年來，我們已經看到許多重大的進展。


今年我們慶祝《臺灣關係法》立法40週年，這項法案向臺灣人民保證，美國將永遠與我們站在一起，就像雷根總統說的：「我方恪守對臺灣之承諾－無須再議」。


我們歡慶「美國在台協會」新館正式開幕，這是美國在臺北的代表處，象徵兩國共享許許多多的利益。


我們感謝國會對臺灣展現跨黨派始終如一的支持，繼2018年通過《臺灣旅行法》之後，再將臺灣納入《亞洲再保證倡議法案》及《約翰‧馬侃國防授權法案》等立法。


我們肯定美國持續對臺出售重要的防禦性武器，展現我們對國防及亞太區域整體安全的承諾。


我很高興告訴各位，美國政府繼出售我們新型M1A2坦克與導彈後，上週又正式同意出售臺灣66架新一代F-16V戰機。


這些最新的軍售案代表我們的國軍官兵很快就能駕駛M1A2坦克保衛我們的海岸，並飛馳F-16V戰機捍衛領空。


我要清楚表明的是：我們採購軍備不是為了要引發衝突，而是我們大家都明白，實力才能讓霸權有所忌憚。


面對中國戰機跨越臺海中線並穿越我們的領空，情勢不容我們對其意圖抱持天真，沒有準備好保護自己，就無法阻止侵略。我們必須清楚展現，我們堅定捍衛自由、民主和生活方式的決心。


無論情勢多麼險峻，我們兩國就是決心要捍衛我們共同珍惜的價值和信念。


副總統彭斯說：「美國始終相信，臺灣對民主的擁抱，為所有的中國人展示了一條更好的道路。」這句話在區域內獲得了廣大的共鳴。


臺美民間的積極交流，諸如我們與美國退伍軍團協會的長久友誼，也讓雙方關係更加堅實。


許多人可能會很訝異，我們與美國退伍軍團協會的關係可追溯到近半個世紀，當時我們請教協會如何改善對榮民的照顧，一直到最近，協會熱烈歡迎我們出席全國大會，總會長們也絡繹訪問臺灣。


去年我們在臺灣見面時，談到我們的互動往來造就實質成果，並針對提供優質醫療、就業輔導和尊嚴長照方面交換經驗，也談到臺灣可以觀摩學習協會的職訓及心理輔導，同時也分享我們的強項，以合理成本提供優質的健保醫療。


會談後，我們研議派遣一名負責退伍軍人事務的代表到美國，這樣一來，我們就可以有效掌握這些議題的後續發展。


此外，我們將尋求推動榮民醫療的交流，鼓勵更多榮民醫院人員訪問美國。


我知道，在美國的鄉鎮，當地即使是連一家雜貨店都沒有，也常會有一棟印有「美國退伍軍團協會」字眼的建築物。我在紐約州綺色佳小鎮求學時，經常路過這些建築物，當時很好奇那些不起眼的辦公室到底是在做什麼的。


現在，我清楚明白協會的工作不僅是協助美國各地的退伍軍人和社區，也扮演全球一股和平與穩定的力量。


美國退伍軍團協會所代表的成員，包括今天在座的各位，都清楚在世界各地不斷有前人為捍衛自由和民主前仆後繼。我們大家都知道，必須時時警惕，自由絕對不會自己從天而降的。


感念過去犧牲的最佳方式，就是在不妥協我們的核心信念下，盡所能地避免衝突。


身為中華民國臺灣總統，我要告訴各位，我們的目標是一致的，我們絕不會尋求和中國發生衝突，但請中國尊重我們的民主制度，我們絕不會刻意挑釁中國，但也不至於對中國的企圖天真無知。


我們將繼續與美國以及全球其他理念相同的國家攜手合作，確保本區域數十年來享有的和平得以存續下去。


在此，我要感謝美國退伍軍團協會及所有會員畢生致力維護我們共享的價值和理念。


你們對維護自由的奉獻，正在全世界各地引發熱烈的迴響。


我要恭喜美國退伍軍團協會歡慶一百週年，祝全國大會圓滿成功，並期待未來我們彼此能更密切合作。


Official Translate：


President Tsai's video address to the 101st American Legion National Convention
2019-08-28


President Tsai Ing-wen delivered a major speech via video before the 101st American Legion National Convention on the afternoon of August 27 Indiana time (early morning of August 28 Taipei time).


The annual convention was held at the American Legion national headquarters in Indianapolis, Indiana, and invited international friends from Taiwan, the United Kingdom, Canada, Korea and other countries to deliver remarks. Distinguished guests included US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, American Legion National Commander Brett Reistad, and Taiwan's Veterans Affairs Commission Deputy Minister Lee Wen-chung (李文忠).


https://english.president.gov.tw/NEWS/5834


It is an honor to address America's largest and one of its most prestigious veteran's organizations. I want to thank National Commander Brett Reistad for his invitation and staunch support for Taiwan – support that is rooted in our shared ideals of freedom and democracy.


While I cannot be here in person, I want to congratulate the American Legion on this important anniversary, as you commemorate a century of service to freedom around the world.


Over the past hundred years, American soldiers have fought and sacrificed to preserve the universal values we hold dear: the belief that we are born free, society should be just, and power should be placed in the hands of the people.


From the battlefields of Europe to the islands of the Pacific, millions of American soldiers have bravely honored those principles. With every sacrifice made, the world inched towards a more just future.


And because of these efforts, countries were able to throw off the yoke of oppression, and were given the freedom to join the community of free societies.


Last December, Brett led a delegation from the American Legion to Taiwan. We discussed our shared interest in protecting liberty in the Asia Pacific, in the hope that we never again have to settle our differences through war. We also exchanged views on how we can take better care of our veterans, to honor their selfless service to our countries.


As I said to Brett then, and I'll say again now: the best way to ensure peace and stability in the Asia Pacific region is to preserve the strong relationship Taiwan and the United States enjoy today, and to remain resolute in our defense of freedom and democracy.


As we all know too well, the struggle for domination and control has played out throughout human history, even though it has taken on new forms.


Today, just across the Taiwan Strait, we struggle with a giant that has chosen to use new tools of technological advancement not for the greater good, but to sow disinformation, division, and discord in free and open societies.


As I have said again and again, Taiwan will never succumb to this pressure. Not on my watch. But we cannot face this challenge alone. We need reinforcement from the global community of like-minded countries.


Fortunately, thanks to support from organizations such as the American Legion, the relationship between Taiwan and the United States is stronger than ever. And we have seen a number of significant developments over the past year.


We commemorated the 40th anniversary of the Taiwan Relations Act, a piece of legislation that has assured the people of Taiwan that the United States will always stand by our side. As Ronald Reagan once said: “We keep our promises to Taiwan. Period.”


We celebrated the formal opening of the new AIT compound, the U.S. representative building in Taipei, which signifies the multitude of interests our countries share.


We acknowledged enduring bipartisan support from Congress, exemplified through Taiwan's inclusion in legislation such as the Asia Reassurance Initiative Act and the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act. This follows the passage of the Taiwan Travel Act in 2018.


We marked the continued sale of important defensive arms to Taiwan, showcasing our commitment towards our own defense, and the security of the Asia Pacific region as a whole.


And on this note, I'm pleased to share with you that last week, the U.S. government formally agreed to sell 66 new F-16Vs to Taiwan, following recent sales of new M1A2 tanks and missile capabilities.


These latest sales mean that our men and women in uniform will soon be driving M1A2s to protect our beaches, and piloting F-16Vs across our skies.


I want to be clear: we don't purchase military hardware because we pursue conflict. We do so because we know, as you do, that power only responds to strength.


As we face Chinese fighter planes that barrel across the center line of the Taiwan Strait and cut through our air space, we cannot afford to be naïve about their intentions. We cannot deter aggression if we are not prepared to protect ourselves. We must show that we are firmly resolved to defend our freedom, democracy, and way of life.


The determination to stand up for our values and beliefs – no matter the odds – is what truly defines our two countries.


As Vice President Mike Pence stated, in words that resonated across the region: “America will always believe that Taiwan's embrace of democracy shows a better path for all the Chinese people.”


The relationship between Taiwan and the United States is also strengthened by robust civil exchanges, such as our longstanding friendship with the American Legion.


Many would be surprised to learn that our bond with the Legion dates back almost half a century, when we first sought advice from the Legion on how to improve veteran care. More recently, the Legion has graciously welcomed our presence at its national conventions, and national commanders have continued to visit Taiwan.


One issue that came up in our conversation last year in Taiwan was how this relationship leads to substantive results, and how we trade best practices when it comes to providing access to quality healthcare, better jobs, and more dignified long-term care. We discussed ways Taiwan can learn from the Legion's job training and support workshops, while sharing our expertise in providing high quality healthcare at an affordable cost.


Following our dialogue, we are looking into the possibility of sending a veterans' affairs representative to the U.S., so that we can follow up on these initiatives.


Furthermore, we will be looking for ways to facilitate exchanges in veterans' healthcare, encouraging more personnel from our veterans' hospitals to visit the U.S.


I know that in small towns and rural communities across America, even if there is no grocery store to be found, you can often find one building emblazoned with the words: American Legion. As a student in the small town of Ithaca in upstate New York, I used to pass by these buildings regularly, wondering what went on inside those unassuming offices.


Today, I recognize that the full scope of the Legion's work encompasses not only supporting veterans and communities across America, but also serving as a force for peace and stability around the world.


The service members the Legion represents – all of you seated here today – recognize the sacrifices that have been made in defense of freedom and democracy around the world. All of you know, as do we, that we must continue to be vigilant, that we can never take our liberty for granted.


The best way to honor these past sacrifices is to do everything we can to avoid future conflict, without ever compromising our core beliefs.


As the President of the Republic of China (Taiwan), I share in this pursuit with all of you. We will not pursue conflict with China, but we ask that they respect our democracy. We will not intentionally provoke China, but neither will we be naïve to China's true intentions.


We will continue to work hand-in-hand with the United States, and other like-minded countries around the world, in the interests of preserving the peace that has served our region so well for decades.


Today, I want to thank the American Legion and all of its members for your lifelong devotion to our shared principles and values.


Your service towards the preservation of liberty resonates around the world.


I also want to offer my congratulations on your 100th anniversary. I wish you a very successful national convention, and look forward to working even more closely with you all in the future.