Tony Blair: 'A mandate for radical change'
Special report: Election 2001 


First published on Tue 8 May 2001 11.46 EDT
https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/may/08/election2001.uk5 


Earlier today, I saw the Queen at Buckingham Palace to ask for a dissolution of parliament so that there can be a general election on June 7.
Every vote in this election is precious. No-one's support should ever be assumed. That is the strength of our democracy.


We earned the trust of the people in 1997 - after 18 long years of opposition.


Today we have to earn that trust again.


I stand before you today with a sense both of humility and of hope.


Humility, because though we can take pride in many achievements since May 1997, we know we still have so much to do, so many challenges still to overcome; and we know also that though we have striven at all times for your trust, there have been times of difficulty too.


Hope, because in every area of our national life that we promised change, however much remains to do, there are also the foundations laid for a brighter future, real progress, beacons lit showing us a better way.


Four years ago, you gave us, New Labour, a majority larger than I, or anyone else, believed you would. That large majority was never a reason to do the job quickly. It added the responsibility to do it properly, for the long term.


No government of change, in any country I can think of, has done it all in one programme, one budget, or one term. Four years has given us the chance to build foundations. But now the work must go on. There is a lot done, a lot more to do and a lot at stake in this election, which offers a more fundamental choice between the two main parties than for many years.


So what are these foundations and what must we build upon them?


The achievement that has most gladdened our supporters and surprised our doubters has been our economic record.


This is a New Labour government pursuing economic prosperity and social justice together.


Today, Britain is the fourth largest economy in the world. With the lowest inflation in Europe, mortgage rates half of what they were in the 80s and 90s, and more people in work than ever before, living standards are rising. It didn't happen by chance, but because we took the tough decisions needed to lay the foundations of economic stability.


Now we must go further, meet the challenge of economic change sweeping the world, and give our people the skills, the technology, the know-how, so that everyone gets the chance not just of a job, but of a career, able to earn a decent living and to make the most of themselves.


Nothing is possible without that basic, hard-won economic stability. When we came to power in May 1997, Britain spent more on interest payments on the National Debt than we spent on schools. We worked hard to put our country*s house in order.


This year, because of the difficult choices we made in our first two years, we will spend £10bn more on schools. There is a different set of priorities in our country today.


When we had the money to invest, we were clear what the number 1 priority would be. Education. Education. Education. The priority then, now and in the future.


In nurseries and primary schools in particular, we have seen real progress as real investment and change has taken place. In 1997, barely 50% of 11 year olds passed their tests. This year, it will be almost 80%.


But now the same step-change must be driven through our secondary schools and universities, so that we end once and for all the old sense of resignation among too many in Britain that their children can't get ahead. that there are two systems of education, one for the privileged, the other narrow and steep for the rest of the young.


In the NHS, waiting lists are lower, new hospitals are being built, there are 17,000 more nurses. Visit many A & E departments or use NHS Direct and you can see change. But we still have much further to go, if we are to see the NHS rebuilt according to its founding principle of quality health care available on the basis of need, not ability to pay.


Crime has fallen 10% since 1997 and police numbers after falling for a decade are now rising again. But drug abuse still blights too many lives. Violent crime still threatens too many communities. So progress, but again, further to go before, with the new investment, we have the largest ever number of police officers Britain has seen.


The New Deal has shown that governments can make a difference in the fight against unemployment. Our programme of welfare reform has led to benefit bills falling in real terms for the first time in decades. At the same time, the minimum wage has lifted the pay of hundreds of thousands.


But we know that there are still one in six non-pensioner homes with no-one working; and still, despite the recent rises in pension, and the winter allowance, we need to reward our pensioners who have saved hard all their lives. Full employment for our generation and security for that of our parents and grandparents.


In other areas like transport or inner city regeneration, there are plans for investment and renewal, but we are acutely aware of how big the challenge is that lies ahead.


Through devolution, a new partnership that has strengthened the United Kingdom and a peace process in Northern Ireland that offers the only hope of a peaceful future. But again much more to do.


So the work goes on and now I seek a mandate not simply for more of the same; I seek a fresh mandate for radical change.


Most people, quite rightly, do not pass their time immersed in politics.


They have the bills to pay, the job to do, the family to raise, the thousand different pressures of everyday life with which to contend. But a general election is different. It is a chance to explain, to engage in a sustained argument about the big issues, and about the country's destiny and direction. The decision as to who governs is a fundamental one for any nation. So in an election that dialogue is possible. People listen. They hear the arguments.


I will travel to every part of the country, not just defending our record, but arguing for the changes our country needs. The spine of my campaign will be a series of speeches that set out the challenge facing the country, and the reforms needed to meet them.


It's great that we have stable economic management. But it's not enough. We need a step-change in productivity, skills and enterprise. And we need reform to deliver it.


I'm proud that we're getting in record investment in our schools and hospitals. But it's not just money our public services need, but real reform to make that money work, and make our public services work for the people who depend on them.


It's a step in the right direction to get police numbers rising again. But on it's own, that's not enough. Not when we have a 19th century criminal justice system coping with 21st century crime.


It's an achievement that we have the welfare bills falling. But there are still too many people not working who could be, and so continuing welfare reform will be essential to our second term agenda.


I'm proud too that Britain is no longer marginalised and isolated in Europe. But we are not yet the leading nation in Europe that our weight, prosperity and history demand.


As New Labour, we seek a mandate not just for continuity but for change, for a Britain, strong, modern and fair.


We seek a mandate to make all the reforms necessary to strengthen, modernise and revitalise our schools and hospitals.


We seek a mandate for investment. Investment to extend opportunities. Ending years of cut backs that denied young people the chance to get on.


We seek a mandate for further reform of the welfare state. To make the tax and benefit system reward work, tackle poverty and penalise irresponsibility.


We seek a mandate to make Britain stronger - stronger because we are engaged with Europe and the wider world, showing our leadership, not in retreat.


But it is a choice that I cannot make alone. The challenge is there for you as well as me. For I see the differences between the main two parties as more stark than at any time since 1983.


For we know today's Conservative party would take us back, back to negative equity, high mortgage rates and boom and bust; back to cuts in public services; back to social division; back to the margins of influence in Europe and the wider world.


So there is a choice. This election is about which party can be trusted with the economy, which party will invest more in our public services, which party is capable of leading Britain into the future.


We have made our choice. It won't be easy. Nothing good ever is.


You all know that any success you have ever had in life, whether an exam passed or a promotion gained, has had its mixture of tough choices, personal application and even pain.


But afterwards, comes the fulfilment of a great goal achieved. And my goal at this election is this: it is not just to win your vote, but to win your support, win your heart and mind in the fight for change that I am leading. And it is change for a purpose: to create a society and nation, where everyone, not just the privileged few, gets the chance to succeed.


We have all heard the term "people in their place". I say to you today; we must reach a time, in our time, when the only rightful place for every man, woman and child in Britain is where their talents take them.


So the great issue of this election is opportunity for all, not just the few. This election is about a radical vision of lifting barriers and liberating people*s potential in a decent society, where everyone gets the chance to make the most of their God-given talent.


We stand:


For more investment, not less,


Advertisement


Economic stability the foundation,


Schools and hospitals first,


Radical reforms and equal chances.


Britain is a great nation. It has so many strengths. But its biggest strength is its people. They, you young people here today, are the nation's potential. This is the time, and ours is the task, to set your talents free and build a land of hope and opportunity for all.


Now you, the people, will decide.