
Address Accepting the Presidential Nomination at the Republican
National Convention in Philadelphia

August 3, 2000

Mr. Chairman, delegates and my fellow citizens, I proudly accept your 
nomination. [applause]
Thank you. Thank you for this honor. [applause]

Thank you for this honor.

Together, we will renew America's purpose. [applause]

Our founders first defined that purpose here in Philadelphia. Ben Franklin was 
here, Thomas
Jefferson and, of course, George Washington, or, as his friends, called him, 
George W. [applause]

Tweet

Bush/Cheney 2000
Location:


Document Archive

• Public Papers of the Presidents

• State of the Union
Addresses & Messages

• Inaugural Addresses

• Farewell Addresses

• Weekly Addresses

• Fireside Chats

• News Conferences

• Executive Orders

• Proclamations

• Signing Statements

• Press Briefings

• Statements of
Administration Policy

• Economic Report of the President

• Debates

• Convention Speeches

• Party Platforms

• 2016 Election Documents

• 2012 Election Documents

• 2008 Election Documents

• 2004 Election Documents

• 1996 Election Documents

• 1968 Election Documents

• 1960 Election Documents

• 2017 Transition

• 2009 Transition

• 2001 Transition

• White House Media Pool Reports

Data Archive

Data Index

Media Archive
Audio/Video Index
Elections

I am proud to have Dick Cheney by my side. [applause]

He is a man—he is a man of integrity and sound judgment who has proven that 
public service can be
noble service. America will be proud to have a leader of such character to 
succeed Al Gore as vice
president of the United States. [applause]

I'm grateful for Senator John McCain. I appreciate so very much his speech two 
nights ago. I
appreciate his friendship. I love his spirit for America. And I want to thank 
the other candidates
who sought this office, as well. Their convictions have strengthened our party. 
[applause]

I'm especially grateful tonight to my family. No matter what else I do in my 
life, asking Laura to
marry me was the best decision I ever made. [applause]

And to our daughters, Barbara and Jenna, we love you a lot. We're proud of you. 
And as you head
off to college this fall, don't stay out too late. [laughter]

And e-mail your old dad once in a while, will you? [laughter]
And mother, everybody loves you and so do I. [applause]

Growing up—growing up, she gave me love and lots of advice. I gave her white 
hair. [laughter]
And I want to thank my dad, the most decent man I have ever known. [applause]

All of my life I have been amazed that a gentle soul could be so strong. Dad, I 
am proud to be your
son. [applause]

United States
Pennsylvania

Font Size:

Share

The American
Presidency Project

Promote Your Page
Too


Election Index
Florida 2000
Links

Presidential Libraries

View Public Papers by
Month and Year

Month                  Year

INCLUDE documents from
the Office of the Press
Secretary

INCLUDE election
campaign documents, vice
presidential documents, first
lady, and other executive

branch officals

View PPPUS

Search the Entire
Document Archive

Enter keyword:

My father was the last president of a great generation, a generation of 
Americans who stormed beaches, liberated
concentration camps and delivered us from evil. Some never came home. Those who 
did put their medals in drawers,
went to work and built on a heroic scale highways and universities, suburbs and 
factories, great cities and grand alliances,
the strong foundations of an American century.

Now the question comes to the sons and daughters of this achievement, what is 
asked of us?

This is a remarkable moment in the life of our nation. Never has the promise of 
prosperity been so vivid. But times of
plenty, like times of crisis, are tests of American character.

Prosperity can be a tool in our hands used to build and better our country, or 
it can be a drug in our system dulling our
sense of urgency, of empathy, of duty. Our opportunities are too great, our 
lives too short, to waste this moment.

So tonight, we vow to our nation we will seize this moment of American promise. 
We will use these good times for great
goals. [applause]

We will confront the hard issues, threats to our national security, threats to 
our health and retirement security, before the
challenges of our time become crises for our children.


AND       OR       NOT

Limit by Year

From:    1789

To    :    2018

Limit results per page

30

INCLUDE documents from
the Office of the Press
Secretary

INCLUDE election
campaign documents, vice
presidential documents, first
lady, and other executive

branch officals

Search

          Instructions          
You   can   search   the   Public
Papers in two ways:

1.  Search  by  Keyword  and
Year

You  can  search  by  keyword
and choose the range of years
within  your  search  by  filling
out  the  boxes  under  Search
the Public Papers.

2.   View   by   Month   and/or
Year

Select  the  month  and/or  year
you   would   like   information
about  and  press  View  Public
Papers. Then choose a Public
Paper  and  the  page  will  load
for you.

Search  Engine  provided  by  the
Harry   S.   Truman   Library.   Our
thanks to

Jim  Borwick  and  Dr.  Rafee  Che
Kassim   at   Project   Whistlestop
for   critical   assistance   in   the
implementation   of   the   search
function,  and  to  Scott  Roley  at
the Truman Library for facilitating
this collaboration.

And we will extend the promise of prosperity to every forgotten corner of this 
country: to every man and woman, a chance
to succeed; to every child, a chance to learn; and to every family, a chance to 
live with dignity and hope. [applause]

For eight years the Clinton-Gore administration has coasted through prosperity. 
The path of least resistance is always
downhill. But America's way is the rising road. This nation is daring and 
decent and ready for change.

Our current president embodied the potential of a generation—so many talents, 
so much charm, such great skill. But in
the end, to what end? So much promise to no great purpose. [applause]

Little more than a—little more than a decade ago, the Cold War thawed, and with 
the leadership of Presidents Reagan and
Bush, that wall came down. [applause]

But instead of seizing this moment, the Clinton-Gore administration has 
squandered it. We have seen a steady erosion of
American power and an unsteady exercise of American influence. Our military is 
low on parts, pay and morale. If called
on by the commander-in-chief today, two entire divisions of the Army would have 
to report, "Not ready for duty, sir."

This administration had its moment, they had their chance, they have not led. 
We will. [applause]

This generation—this generation was given the gift of the best education in 
American history, yet we do not share that gift
with everyone. Seven of 10 fourth graders in our highest poverty schools cannot 
read a simple children's book. And still
this administration continues on the same old path, the same old programs, 
while millions are trapped in schools where
violence is common and learning is rare.

This administration had its chance. They have not led. We will. [applause]

America has a strong economy and a surplus. We have the public resources and 
the public will, even the bipartisan
opportunities to strengthen Social Security and repair Medicare. But this 
administration, during eight years of increasing
need,       did nothing.

They had their moment. They have not led. We will. [applause]

Our generation has a chance to reclaim some essential values, to show we have 
grown up before we grow old. But when
the moment for leadership came, this administration did not teach our children, 
it disillusioned them.

They had their chance. They have not led. We will. [applause]

And now they come asking for another chance, another shot. Our answer: Not this 
time, not this year. [applause]
This is not the time for third chances; it is the time for new beginnings. 
[applause]

The rising generations of this country have our own appointment with greatness. 
It does not rise or fall with the stock
market. It cannot be bought with our wealth. Greatness is found when American 
character and American courage
overcome American challenges.

When Lewis Morris of New York was about to sign the Declaration of 
Independence, his brother advised against it,
warning he would lose all his property. But Morris, a plain-spoken founder, 
responded, "Damn the consequences, give me
the pen." [laughter and applause]

That is the eloquence of American action. We heard it during World War II when 
General Eisenhower told paratroopers
on D-Day morning not to worry. And one replied, "We're not worried, General. 
It's Hitler's turn to worry now." [applause]

We heard it in the civil rights movement, when brave men and women that did not 
say, "We shall cope," or "We shall see."
They said, "We shall overcome." [applause]

An American president must call upon that character. Tonight in this hall, we 
resolve to be the party of—not of repose but
of reform. We will write not footnotes but chapters in the American story. We 
will add the work of our hands to the
inheritance of our fathers and mothers and leave this nation greater than we 
found it. [applause]

We know the test of leadership. The issues are joined. We will strengthen 
Social Security and Medicare for the greatest
generation and for generations to come. [applause]

Medicare does more than meet the needs of our elderly; it reflects the values 
of our society. We will set it on firm financial
ground and make prescription drugs available and affordable for every senior 
who needs them. [applause]

Social Security has been called the third rail of American politics, the one 
you're not supposed to touch because it might
shock you. But if you don't touch it, you cannot fix it. And I intend to fix 
it. [applause]

To the seniors in this country, you earned your benefits, you made your plans, 
and President George W. Bush will keep the
promise of Social Security. No changes, no reductions, no way. [applause]

Our opponents will say otherwise. This is their last parting ploy, and don't 
believe a word of it.


Now is the time—now is the time for Republicans and Democrats to end the 
politics of fear and save Social Security
together. [applause]

For younger workers, we will give you the option, your choice, to put part of 
your payroll taxes into sound, responsible
investments. [applause]

This will mean a higher return on your money in over 30 or 40 years, a nest egg 
to help your retirement or to pass on to
your children. When this money is in your name, in your account, it's not just 
a program, it's your property.

Now is the time to give American workers security and independence that no 
politician can ever take away. [applause]

On education, too many American children are segregated into schools without 
standards, shuffled from grade to grade
because of their age, regardless of their knowledge. This is discrimination, 
pure and simple, the soft bigotry of low
expectations. And our nation...[applause]

And our nation should treat it like other forms of discrimination: We should 
end it. [applause]

One size does not fit all when it comes to educating our children, so local 
people should control local schools. [applause]

And those who spend your tax dollars must be held accountable. When a school 
district receives federal funds to teach
poor children, we expect them to learn. And if they don't, parents should get 
the money to make a different choice.
[applause]

Now is the time to make Head Start an early learning program to teach all our 
children to read and renew the promise of
America's public schools. [applause]

Another test of leadership is tax relief. [applause]

The last time taxes were this high as a percentage of our economy, there was a 
good reason; we were fighting World War

II. Today our high taxes fund a surplus.

Some say that growing federal surplus means Washington has more money to spend. 
But they've got it backwards. The
surplus is not the government's money; the surplus is the people's money. 
[applause]

I will use this moment of opportunity to bring common sense and fairness to the 
tax code. And I will act on principle. On
principle, every family, every farmer and small-business person should be free 
to pass on their life's work to those they
love, so we will abolish the death tax. [applause]

On principle, no one in America should have to pay more than a third of their 
income to the federal government, so we
will reduce tax rates for everyone in every bracket.

On principle, those with the greatest need should receive the greatest help, so 
we will lower the bottom rate from 15
percent to 10 percent and double the child credit. [applause]

Now is the time to reform the tax code and share some of the surplus with the 
people who pay the bills. [applause]

The world needs America's strength and leadership. And America's armed forces 
need better equipment, better training
and better pay. [applause]

We will give our military the means to keep the peace, and we will give it one 
thing more: a commander-in-chief who
respects our men and women in uniform and a commander-in-chief who earns their 
respect. [applause]

A generation shaped by Vietnam must remember the lessons of Vietnam: When 
America uses force in the world, the cause
must be just, the goal must be clear, and the victory must be overwhelming. 
[applause]

I will work to reduce nuclear weapons and nuclear tension in the world, to turn 
these years of influence into decades of
peace. And at the earliest possible date, my administration will deploy missile 
defenses to guard against attack and
blackmail. [applause]

Now is the time not to defend outdated treaties but to defend the American 
people. [applause]

A time of prosperity is a test of vision, and our nation today needs vision. 
That's a fact. That's a fact. Or as my opponent
might call it, a risky truth scheme. [laughter and applause]

Every one of the proposals I've talked about tonight he's called a risky scheme 
over and over again. It is the sum of his
message, the politics of the roadblock, the philosophy of the stop sign.

If my opponent had been at the moon launch, it would have been a risky rocket 
scheme. [laughter and applause]

If he had been there when Edison was testing the light bulb, it would have been 
a risky anti-candle scheme. [laughter]
And if he had been there when the Internet was invented...


Audience. No more Gore. No more Gore. No more Gore.

Governor Bush. He now leads—he now leads the party of Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt, but the only thing he has to offer is
fear itself. [applause]

That outlook is typical of many in Washington, always seeing the tunnel at the 
end of the light. [applause]

But I come from a different place and it has made me a different leader. In 
Midland, Texas, where I grew up, the town
motto was, "The sky's the limit," and we believed it. There was a restless 
energy, a basic conviction that with hard work,
anybody could succeed and everybody deserved a chance.

Our sense of community—our sense of community was just as strong as that sense 
of promise. Neighbors helped each
other. There were dry wells and sand storms to keep you humble, lifelong 
friends to take your side, and churches to
remind us that every soul is equal in value and equal in need. [applause]

This background leaves more than an accent, it leaves an outlook: optimistic, 
impatient with pretense, confident that
people can chart their own course in life.

That background may lack the polish of Washington. Then again, I don't have a 
lot of things that come with Washington. I
don't have enemies to fight. I have no stake in the bitter arguments of the 
last few years. I want to change the tone of
Washington to one of civility and respect. [applause]

The largest lesson I learned in Midland still guides me as governor of Texas: 
Everyone, from immigrant to entrepreneur,
has an equal claim on this country's promise. So we improved our schools 
dramatically for children of every accent, of
every background. We moved people from welfare to work. We strengthened our 
juvenile justice laws. Our budgets have
been balanced with surpluses. And we cut taxes, not only once, but twice. 
[applause]

We accomplished a lot. I don't deserve all the credit, and I don't attempt to 
take it. I worked with Republicans and
Democrats to get things done.

A bittersweet part of tonight is that someone is missing, the late lieutenant 
government of Texas, Bob Bullock. [applause]

Bob was a Democrat, a crusty veteran of Texas politics, and my great friend. We 
worked side by side, he endorsed my
reelection, and I know he is with me in spirit in saying to those who would 
malign our state for political gain: Don't mess
with Texas. [applause]

As governor, I've made difficult decisions and stood by them under pressure. 
I've been where the buck stops in business
and in government. I've been a chief executive who sets an agenda, sets big 
goals, and rallies people to believe and achieve
them. I am proud of this record, and I am prepared for the work ahead.

If you give me your trust, I will honor it. Grant me a mandate, I will use it. 
Give me the opportunity to lead this nation,
and I will lead. [applause]

And we need a leader to seize the opportunities of this new century: the new 
cures of medicine, the amazing technologies
that will drive our economy and keep the peace. But our new economy must never 
forget the old, unfinished struggle for
human dignity. And here we face a challenge to the very heart and founding 
premise of our nation.

A couple of years ago, I visited a juvenile jail in Marlin, Texas, and talked 
with a group of young inmates. They were angry,
wary kids. All had committed grown-up crimes. Yet when I looked in their eyes, 
I realized some of them were still little
boys.

Toward the end of the conversation, one young man, about 15 years old, raised 
his hand and asked a haunting question,
"What do you think of me?" He seemed to be asking, like many Americans who 
struggle: Is their hope for me? Do I have a
chance? And, frankly, do you, a white man in a suit, really care about what 
happens to me?

A small voice, but it speaks for so many: single moms struggling to feed the 
kids and pay the rent; immigrants starting a
hard life in a new world; children without fathers in neighborhoods where gangs 
seem like friendship or drugs promise
peace, and where sex sadly seems the closest thing to belonging. We are their 
country too. And each of us must share in its
promise or the promise is diminished for all.

If that boy in Marlin believes he's trapped and worthless and hopeless, if he 
believes his life has no value, then other lives
have no value to him, and we're all diminished.

When these problems are not confronted, it builds a wall within our nation. On 
one side are wealth, technology, education
and ambition. On the other side of that wall are poverty and prison, addiction 
and despair. And my fellow Americans, we
must tear down that wall.

Big government is not the answer, but the alternative to bureaucracy is not 
indifference. It is to put conservative values
and conservative ideas into the thick of the fight for justice and opportunity.

This is what I mean by compassionate conservatism. And on this ground, we will 
lead our nation. [applause]


We will give low-income Americans tax credits to buy the private health 
insurance they need and deserve. [applause]

We will transform today's housing rental program to help hundreds of thousands 
of low-income families find stability and
dignity in a home of their own. [applause]

And in the next bold step of welfare reform, we will support the heroic work of 
homeless shelters and hospices, food
pantry and crisis pregnancy centers, people reclaiming their communities block 
by block and heart by heart. [applause]

I think of Mary Jo Copeland, whose ministry called Sharing and Caring Hands 
serves 1,000 meals a week in Minneapolis,
Minnesota. [applause]

Each day, Mary Jo washes the feet of the homeless and sends them off with new 
socks and shoes. "Look after your feet,"
she tells them. "They must carry you a long way in this world, and then all the 
way to God."

Government cannot do this work. It can feed the body, but it cannot reach the 
soul. [applause]

Yet, government can take the side of these groups, helping the helper, 
encouraging the inspired. My administration will
give taxpayers new incentives to donate to charity, encourage after-school 
programs that build character, and support
mentoring groups that shape and save young lives. [applause]

We must give our children a spirit of moral courage because their character is 
our destiny. [applause]

We must tell them—we must tell them—we must tell them with confidence that 
drugs and alcohol can destroy you, and
bigotry disfigures the heart. [applause]

Our schools must support the ideals of parents, elevating character and 
abstinence from afterthoughts to urgent goals.
[applause]

We must help protect our children in our schools and streets, and by finally 
and strictly enforcing our nation's gun laws.
[applause]

But most of all, we must teach our children the values that defeat violence. I 
will lead our nation toward a culture that
values life—the life of the elderly and sick, the life of the young and the 
life of the unborn. [applause]

Good people can disagree on this issue, but surely we can agree on ways to 
value life by promoting adoption, parental
notification. And when Congress sends me a bill against partial-birth abortion, 
I will sign it into law. [applause]

Behind every goal I've talked about tonight is a great hope for our country. A 
hundred years from now this must not be
remembered as an age rich in possession and poor in ideals. Instead, we must 
usher in an era of responsibility. [applause]

My generation tested limits, and our country in some ways is better for it. 
Women are now treated more equally.
[applause]

Racial progress has been steady; it's still too slow. We're learning to 
protect...[applause]...we're learning to protect the
natural world around us. We will continue this progress, and we will not turn 
back. [applause]

At times we lost our way, but we're coming home. [applause]

So many of us held our first child and saw a better self reflected in her eyes. 
And in that family love, many have found the
sign and symbol of an even greater love, and have been touched by faith.

We discovered that who we are is more than important than what we have. And we 
know we must renew our values to
restore our country. [applause]

This is the vision of America's founders. They never saw our nation's greatness 
in rising wealth or in advancing armies,
but in small, unnumbered acts of caring and courage and self-denial. Their 
highest hope, as Robert Frost described it, was
to occupy the land with character. And that, 13 generations later, is still our 
goal, to occupy the land with character.
[applause]

In a responsibility era, each of us has important tasks, work that only we can 
do. Each of us is responsible to love and
guide our children and to help a neighbor in need. Synagogues, churches and 
mosques are responsible, not only to
worship, but to serve. Corporations are responsible to treat their workers 
fairly and to leave the air and waters clean.
[applause]

And our nation's leaders our responsible to confront problems, not pass them 
onto others. [applause]
And to lead this nation to a responsibility era, that president himself must be 
responsible.

So when I put my hand on the Bible, I will swear to not only uphold the laws of 
our land, I will swear to uphold the honor
and dignity of the office to which I have been elected, so help me God. 
[applause]

I believe the presidency, the final point of decision in the American 
government, was made for great purposes. It is the


office of Lincoln's conscience, of Teddy Roosevelt's energy, of Harry Truman's 
integrity and Ronald Reagan's optimism.
[applause]

For me, gaining this office is not the ambition of a lifetime, but it is the 
opportunity of a lifetime, and I will make the most
of it. [applause]

I believe great decision are made with care, made with conviction, not made 
with polls. [applause]

I do not need to take your pulse before I know my own mind. I do not reinvent 
myself at every turn. I am not running in
borrowed clothes. [applause]

When I act, you will know my reasons. And when I speak, you will know my heart. 
[applause]
I believe in tolerance, not in spite of my faith, but because of it. [applause]

I believe in a God who calls us not to judge our neighbors but to love them. 
[applause]

I believe in grace because I've seen it, and peace because I've felt it, and 
forgiveness because I've needed it. [applause]
I believe true leadership is a process of addition, not an act of division.

I will not attack a part of this country because I want to lead the whole of 
it. [applause]

And I believe this'll be a tough race, down to the wire. Their war room is up 
and running, but we are ready. [applause]

Their attacks will be relentless, but they will be answered. We are facing 
something familiar, but they're facing something
new. [applause]

We are now the party of ideas and innovation, the party of idealism and 
inclusion, the party of a simple and powerful
hope.

My fellow citizens, we can begin again. [applause]

After all of the shouting and all of the scandal, after all the bitterness and 
broken faith, we can begin again. [applause]
The wait has been long, but it won't be long now. [applause]

A prosperous nation is ready to renew its purpose and unite behind great goals, 
and it won't be long now. [applause]

Our nation must renew the hopes of that boy I talked with in jail and so many 
like him, and it won't be long now.
[applause]

Our country is ready for high standards and new leaders, and it won't be long 
now. [applause]

An era of tarnished ideals is giving way to a responsibility era, and it won't 
be long now. [applause]

I know how serious the task is before me. I know the presidency is an office 
that turns pride into prayer. But I am eager to
start on the work ahead, and I believe America is ready for a new beginning. 
[applause]

My friend, the artist Tom Lea of El Paso, Texas, captured the way I feel about 
our great land, a land I love. He and his wife,
he said, live on the east side of the mountain. It's the sunrise side, not the 
sunset side. It is the side to see the day that is
coming, not to see the day that has gone.

Americans live on the sunrise side of the mountain. The night is passing, and 
we're ready for the day to come.
God bless. God bless America.

Mr. Chairman, delegates, and my fellow citizens ... I accept your nomination. 
Thank you for this honor. Together, we will renew America's
purpose.

Our founders first defined that purpose here in Philadelphia ... Ben Franklin 
was here. Thomas Jefferson. And, of course, George
Washington -- or, as his friends called him, "George W."

I am proud to have Dick Cheney at my side. He is a man of integrity and sound 
judgment, who has proven that public service can be noble
service. America will be proud to have a leader of such character to succeed Al 
Gore as Vice President of the United States.

I am grateful for John McCain and the other candidates who sought this 
nomination. Their convictions strengthen our party.
I am especially grateful tonight to my family.

No matter what else I do in life, asking Laura to marry me was the best 
decision I ever made.

To our daughters, Barbara and Jenna, we love you, we're proud of you, and as 
you head off to college this fall          Don't stay out too late,

and e-mail your old dad once in a while, will you?


And mother, everyone loves you and so do I.

Growing up, she gave me love and lots of advice. I gave her white hair. And I 
want to thank my father -- the most decent man I have ever
known. All my life I have been amazed that a gentle soul could be so strong. 
And Dad, I want you to know how proud I am to be your son.

My father was the last president of a great generation. A generation of 
Americans who stormed beaches, liberated concentration camps and
delivered us from evil.

Some never came home.

Those who did put their medals in drawers, went to work, and built on a heroic 
scale ... highways and universities, suburbs and factories,
great cities and grand alliances -- the strong foundations of an American 
Century.

Now the question comes to the sons and daughters of this achievement...
What is asked of us?

This is a remarkable moment in the life of our nation. Never has the promise of 
prosperity been so vivid. But times of plenty, like times of
crisis, are tests of American character.

Prosperity can be a tool in our hands -- used to build and better our country. 
Or it can be a drug in our system -- dulling our sense of
urgency, of empathy, of duty.

Our opportunities are too great, our lives too short, to waste this moment.
So tonight we vow to our nation ...

We will seize this moment of American promise.
We will use these good times for great goals.

We will confront the hard issues -- threats to our national security, threats 
to our health and retirement security -- before the challenges of
our time become crises for our children.

And we will extend the promise of prosperity to every forgotten corner of this 
country.

To every man and woman, a chance to succeed. To every child, a chance to learn. 
To every family, a chance to live with dignity and hope.
For eight years, the Clinton/Gore administration has coasted through 
prosperity.

And the path of least resistance is always downhill.
But America's way is the rising road.

This nation is daring and decent and ready for change.

Our current president embodied the potential of a generation. So many talents. 
So much charm. Such great skill. But, in the end, to what
end? So much promise, to no great purpose.

Little more than a decade ago, the Cold War thawed and, with the leadership of 
Presidents Reagan and Bush, that wall came down.

But instead of seizing this moment, the Clinton/Gore administration has 
squandered it. We have seen a steady erosion of American power
and an unsteady exercise of American influence.

Our military is low on parts, pay and morale.

If called on by the commander-in-chief today, two entire divisions of the Army 
would have to report ... Not ready for duty, sir.
This administration had its moment.

They had their chance. They have not led. We will.

This generation was given the gift of the best education in American history. 
Yet we do not share that gift with everyone. Seven of ten
fourth-graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read a simple children's 
book.

And still this administration continues on the same old path with the same old 
programs -- while millions are trapped in schools where
violence is common and learning is rare.

This administration had its chance. They have not led. We will.

America has a strong economy and a surplus. We have the public resources and 
the public will -- even the bipartisan opportunities -- to
strengthen Social Security and repair Medicare.

But this administration -- during eight years of increasing need -- did nothing.
They had their moment. They have not led. We will.

Our generation has a chance to reclaim some essential values -- to show we have 
grown up before we grow old.


But when the moment for leadership came, this administration did not teach our 
children, it disillusioned them.
They had their chance. They have not led. We will.

And now they come asking for another chance, another shot.
Our answer?

Not this time.
Not this year.

This is not a time for third chances, it is a time for new beginnings. The 
rising generations of this country have our own appointment with
greatness.

It does not rise or fall with the stock market. It cannot be bought with our 
wealth.

Greatness is found when American character and American courage overcome 
American challenges.

When Lewis Morris of New York was about to sign the Declaration of 
Independence, his brother advised against it, warning he would lose
all his property.

Morris, a plain-spoken Founder, responded ... "Damn the consequences, give me 
the pen." That is the eloquence of American action.

We heard it during World War II, when General Eisenhower told paratroopers on 
D-Day morning not to worry -- and one replied, "We're
not worried, General ... It's Hitler's turn to worry now."

We heard it in the civil rights movement, when brave men and women did not say 
... "We shall cope," or "We shall see." They said ... "We
shall overcome."

An American president must call upon that character.

Tonight, in this hall, we resolve to be, not the party of repose, but the party 
of reform.
We will write, not footnotes, but chapters in the American story.

We will add the work of our hands to the inheritance of our fathers and mothers 
-- and leave this nation greater than we found it.
We know the tests of leadership. The issues are joined.

We will strengthen Social Security and Medicare for the greatest generation, 
and for generations to come.
Medicare does more than meet the needs of our elderly, it reflects the values 
of our society.

We will set it on firm financial ground, and make prescription drugs available 
and affordable for every senior who needs them.
Social Security has been called the "third rail of American politics" -- the 
one you're not supposed to touch because it shocks you.
But, if you don't touch it, you can't fix it. And I intend to fix it.

To seniors in this country ... You earned your benefits, you made your plans, 
and President George W. Bush will keep the promise of Social
Security ... no changes, no reductions, no way.

Our opponents will say otherwise. This is their last, parting ploy, and don't 
believe a word of it.

Now is the time for Republicans and Democrats to end the politics of fear and 
save Social Security, together.

For younger workers, we will give you the option -- your choice -- to put a 
part of your payroll taxes into sound, responsible investments.
This will mean a higher return on your money, and, over 30 or 40 years, a nest 
egg to help your retirement, or pass along to your children.
When this money is in your name, in your account, it's not just a program, it's 
your property.

Now is the time to give American workers security and independence that no 
politician can ever take away.

On education ... Too many American children are segregated into schools without 
standards, shuffled from grade-to-grade because of their
age, regardless of their knowledge.

This is discrimination, pure and simple -- the soft bigotry of low 
expectations.

And our nation should treat it like other forms of discrimination ... We should 
end it.

One size does not fit all when it comes to educating our children, so local 
people should control local schools.
And those who spend your tax dollars must be held accountable.

When a school district receives federal funds to teach poor children, we expect 
them to learn. And if they don't, parents should get the money
to make a different choice.


Now is the time to make Head Start an early learning program, teach all our 
children to read, and renew the promise of America's public
schools. Another test of leadership is tax relief.

The last time taxes were this high as a percentage of our economy, there was a 
good reason ... We were fighting World War II.
Today, our high taxes fund a surplus. Some say that growing federal surplus 
means Washington has more money to spend.

But they've got it backwards.

The surplus is not the government's money. The surplus is the people's money.

I will use this moment of opportunity to bring common sense and fairness to the 
tax code.
And I will act on principle.

On principle ... every family, every farmer and small businessperson, should be 
free to pass on their life's work to those they love.
So we will abolish the death tax.

On principle ... no one in America should have to pay more than a third of 
their income to the federal government.
So we will reduce tax rates for everyone, in every bracket.

On principle ... those in the greatest need should receive the greatest help.

So we will lower the bottom rate from 15 percent to 10 percent and double the 
child tax credit.

Now is the time to reform the tax code and share some of the surplus with the 
people who pay the bills.

The world needs America's strength and leadership, and America's armed forces 
need better equipment, better training, and better pay.

We will give our military the means to keep the peace, and we will give it one 
thing more ... a commander-in-chief who respects our men
and women in uniform, and a commander-in-chief who earns their respect.

A generation shaped by Vietnam must remember the lessons of Vietnam.

When America uses force in the world, the cause must be just, the goal must be 
clear, and the victory must be overwhelming.

I will work to reduce nuclear weapons and nuclear tension in the world -- to 
turn these years of influence into decades of peace.
And, at the earliest possible date, my administration will deploy missile 
defenses to guard against attack and blackmail.

Now is the time, not to defend outdated treaties, but to defend the American 
people.

A time of prosperity is a test of vision. And our nation today needs vision. 
That is a fact ... or as my opponent might call it, a "risky truth
scheme." Every one of the proposals I've talked about tonight, he has called a 
"risky scheme," over and over again.

It is the sum of his message -- the politics of the roadblock, the philosophy 
of the stop sign.

If my opponent had been there at the moon launch, it would have been a "risky 
rocket scheme."

If he'd been there when Edison was testing the light bulb, it would have been a 
"risky anti-candle scheme."
And if he'd been there when the Internet was invented well ... I understand he 
actually was there for that.
He now leads the party of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. But the only thing he has 
to offer is fear itself.

That outlook is typical of many in Washington -- always seeing the tunnel at 
the end of the light.

But I come from a different place, and it has made me a different leader. In 
Midland, Texas, where I grew up, the town motto was "the sky is
the limit" ... and we believed it.

There was a restless energy, a basic conviction that, with hard work, anybody 
could succeed, and everybody deserved a chance.
Our sense of community was just as strong as that sense of promise.

Neighbors helped each other. There were dry wells and sandstorms to keep you 
humble, and lifelong friends to take your side, and churches
to remind us that every soul is equal in value and equal in need.

This background leaves more than an accent, it leaves an outlook.

Optimistic. Impatient with pretense. Confident that people can chart their own 
course.

That background may lack the polish of Washington. Then again, I don't have a 
lot of things that come with Washington.

I don't have enemies to fight. And I have no stake in the bitter arguments of 
the last few years. I want to change the tone of Washington to
one of civility and respect.

The largest lesson I learned in Midland still guides me as governor ... 
Everyone, from immigrant to entrepreneur, has an equal claim on this


country's promise.

So we improved our schools, dramatically, for children of every accent, of 
every background.
We moved people from welfare to work.

We strengthened our juvenile justice laws.

Our budgets have been balanced, with surpluses, and we cut taxes not only once, 
but twice.
We accomplished a lot.

I don't deserve all the credit, and don't attempt to take it. I worked with 
Republicans and Democrats to get things done.
A bittersweet part of tonight is that someone is missing, the late Lt. Governor 
of Texas Bob Bullock.

Bob was a Democrat, a crusty veteran of Texas politics, and my great friend.

He worked by my side, endorsed my re-election, and I know he is with me in 
spirit in saying to those who would malign our state for
political gain... Don't mess with Texas.

As governor, I've made difficult decisions, and stood by them under pressure. 
I've been where the buck stops -- in business and in
government. I've been a chief executive who sets an agenda, sets big goals, and 
rallies people to believe and achieve them.

I am proud of this record, and I'm prepared for the work ahead.

If you give me your trust, I will honor it ... Grant me a mandate, and I will 
use it... Give me the opportunity to lead this nation, and I will
lead ...

And we need a leader to seize the opportunities of this new century -- the new 
cures of medicine, the amazing technologies that will drive
our economy and keep the peace.

But our new economy must never forget the old, unfinished struggle for human 
dignity.
And here we face a challenge to the very heart and founding premise of our 
nation.

A couple of years ago, I visited a juvenile jail in Marlin, Texas, and talked 
with a group of young inmates. They were angry, wary kids. All
had committed grownup crimes.

Yet when I looked in their eyes, I realized some of them were still little 
boys.

Toward the end of conversation, one young man, about 15, raised his hand and 
asked a haunting question... "What do you think of me?"

He seemed to be asking, like many Americans who struggle ... "Is there hope for 
me? Do I have a chance?" And, frankly ... "Do you, a white
man in a suit, really care what happens to me?"

A small voice, but it speaks for so many. Single moms struggling to feed the 
kids and pay the rent. Immigrants starting a hard life in a new
world. Children without fathers in neighborhoods where gangs seem like 
friendship, where drugs promise peace, and where sex, sadly,
seems like the closest thing to belonging. We are their country, too.

And each of us must share in its promise, or that promise is diminished for 
all.

If that boy in Marlin believes he is trapped and worthless and hopeless -- if 
he believes his life has no value, then other lives have no value to
him -- and we are ALL diminished.

When these problems aren't confronted, it builds a wall within our nation. On 
one side are wealth and technology, education and ambition.
On the other side of the wall are poverty and prison, addiction and despair.

And, my fellow Americans, we must tear down that wall.

Big government is not the answer. But the alternative to bureaucracy is not 
indifference.

It is to put conservative values and conservative ideas into the thick of the 
fight for justice and opportunity.
This is what I mean by compassionate conservatism. And on this ground we will 
govern our nation.

We will give low-income Americans tax credits to buy the private health 
insurance they need and deserve.

We will transform today's housing rental program to help hundreds of thousands 
of low-income families find stability and dignity in a
home of their own.

And, in the next bold step of welfare reform, we will support the heroic work 
of homeless shelters and hospices, food pantries and crisis
pregnancy centers -- people reclaiming their communities block-by-block and 
heart-by-heart.

I think of Mary Jo Copeland, whose ministry called "Sharing and Caring Hands" 
serves 1,000 meals a week in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Each day, Mary Jo washes the feet of the homeless, then sends them off with new 
socks and shoes.


"Look after your feet," she tells them         "They must carry you a long way 
in this world, and then all the way to God."

Government cannot do this work. It can feed the body, but it cannot reach the 
soul. Yet government can take the side of these groups,
helping the helper, encouraging the inspired.

My administration will give taxpayers new incentives to donate to charity, 
encourage after-school programs that build character, and
support mentoring groups that shape and save young lives.

We must give our children a spirit of moral courage, because their character is 
our destiny.

We must tell them, with clarity and confidence, that drugs and alcohol can 
destroy you, and bigotry disfigures the heart.
Our schools must support the ideals of parents, elevating character and 
abstinence from afterthoughts to urgent goals.
We must help protect our children, in our schools and streets, by finally and 
strictly enforcing our nation's gun laws.

Most of all, we must teach our children the values that defeat violence. I will 
lead our nation toward a culture that values life -- the life of the
elderly and the sick, the life of the young, and the life of the unborn. I know 
good people disagree on this issue, but surely we can agree on
ways to value life by promoting adoption and parental notification, and when 
Congress sends me a bill against partial-birth abortion, I will
sign it into law.

Behind every goal I have talked about tonight is a great hope for our country.

A hundred years from now, this must not be remembered as an age rich in 
possessions and poor in ideals.
Instead, we must usher in an era of responsibility.

My generation tested limits -- and our country, in some ways, is better for it.

Women are now treated more equally. Racial progress has been steady, if still 
too slow. We are learning to protect the natural world
around us. We will continue this progress, and we will not turn back.

At times, we lost our way. But we are coming home.

So many of us held our first child, and saw a better self reflected in her 
eyes.

And in that family love, many have found the sign and symbol of an even greater 
love, and have been touched by faith.

We have discovered that who we are is more important than what we have. And we 
know we must renew our values to restore our country.
This is the vision of America's founders.

They never saw our nation's greatness in rising wealth or advancing armies, but 
in small, unnumbered acts of caring and courage and self-
denial.

Their highest hope, as Robert Frost described it, was "to occupy the land with 
character."
And that, 13 generations later, is still our goal     to occupy the land with 
character.

In a responsibility era, each of us has important tasks -- work that only we 
can do.
Each of us is responsible     to love and guide our children, and help a 
neighbor in need.

Synagogues, churches and mosques are responsible     not only to worship but to 
serve.

Corporations are responsible     to treat their workers fairly, and leave the 
air and waters clean.

Our nation's leaders are responsible     to confront problems, not pass them on 
to others.

And to lead this nation to a responsibility era, a president himself must be 
responsible.

And so, when I put my hand on the Bible, I will swear to not only uphold the 
laws of our land, I will swear to uphold the honor and dignity
of the office to which I have been elected, so help me God.

I believe the presidency -- the final point of decision in the American 
government -- was made for great purposes.

It is the office of Lincoln's conscience and Teddy Roosevelt's energy and Harry 
Truman's integrity and Ronald Reagan's optimism.
For me, gaining this office is not the ambition of a lifetime, but it IS the 
opportunity of a lifetime.

And I will make the most of it. I believe great decisions are made with care, 
made with conviction, not made with polls.

I do not need to take your pulse before I know my own mind. I do not reinvent 
myself at every turn. I am not running in borrowed clothes.
When I act, you will know my reasons    When I speak, you will know my heart.

I believe in tolerance, not in spite of my faith, but because of it.

I believe in a God who calls us, not to judge our neighbors, but to love them.


I believe in grace, because I have seen it ... In peace, because I have felt it 
... In forgiveness, because I have needed it.

I believe true leadership is a process of addition, not an act of division. I 
will not attack a part of this country, because I want to lead the
whole of it.

And I believe this will be a tough race, down to the wire.

Their war room is up and running ... but we are ready. Their attacks will be 
relentless ... but they will be answered. We are facing
something familiar, but they are facing something new.

We are now the party of ideas and innovation ... The party of idealism and 
inclusion.
The party of a simple and powerful hope ...

My fellow citizens, we can begin again. After all of the shouting, and all of 
the scandal. After all of the bitterness and broken faith. We can
begin again.

The wait has been long, but it won't be long now.

A prosperous nation is ready to renew its purpose and unite behind great goals 
... and it won't be long now.

Our nation must renew the hopes of that boy I talked with in jail, and so many 
like him... and it won't be long now.
Our country is ready for high standards and new leaders ... and it won't be 
long now.

An era of tarnished ideals is giving way to a responsibility era ... and it 
won't be long now.
I know how serious the task is before me.

I know the presidency is an office that turns pride into prayer.
But I am eager to start on the work ahead.

And I believe America is ready for a new beginning.

My friend, the artist Tom Lea of El Paso, captured the way I feel about our 
great land.
He and his wife, he said, "live on the east side of the mountain ...

It is the sunrise side, not the sunset side.

It is the side to see the day that is coming ... not the side to see the day 
that is gone."
Americans live on the sunrise side of mountain.

The night is passing.

And we are ready for the day to come.
Thank you. And God bless you.

Citation: George W. Bush: "Address Accepting the Presidential Nomination at the 
Republican National Convention in Philadelphia," August 3, 2000.
Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project. 
http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=25954.

Home            ContactContact

© 1999-2018 - Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley - The American Presidency 
Project ™

